# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Inside Rebellion: The Politics of Insurgent Violence 
author(s): Jeremy M. #Weinstein
year: #y2006
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Violence #Insurgency
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

Inside Rebellion: The Politics of Insurgent Violence (2006)

Jeremy M. Weinstein, Professor of Political Science at Stanford

Ph.D in Government at Harvard (again, what a shocker!)

On Kitagawa's dissertation committee (pretty cool)

**Sorry, this is going to be a long one but very interesting**

Book in a nutshell (via book review): "Weinstein's central contention is
that rebel groups which emerge from resource-rich environments or secure
the 'support of an outside patron tend to commit high levels of
indiscriminate violence; movements that arise in resource-poor contexts
perpetrate far fewer abuses and employ violence selectively and
strategically' (p. 7). The link between violence and resources is
straightforward: where rebels lack means they depend upon the civilian
population to survive and must interact with them. Weinstein terms such
instances 'activist' rebellions since they require long-term
awareness-raising, mobilisation and networking to create a viable base
from which to challenge the state. Activist groups are disciplined,
well-organised and recruit 'investors' prepared to wait on the ultimate
rewards of state power. Where resources are abundant, however,
rebellions attract 'consumers' seeking immediate gains. These
'opportunistic' insurgencies do not cultivate ties to the civilian
population which, combined with an emphasis on short-term rewards,
results in indiscipline and indiscriminate, self-serving violence."

Chapter 1 in a nutshell (in his own words so tyvm Jeremy!): "This
chapter begins by exploring previous approaches to the study of
rebellion. While the approach pursued by practitioners of guerrilla war,
like my own, dedicates substantial attention to question of how groups
form, organization takes a backseat to broader structural factors in
traditional studies of revolution, which treat groups alternatively as
social movements or as states. I then describe my own approach to
understanding why groups turn to coercion. In conceptualizing strategy
as a problem of institutional choice, I first explain the distinct set
of organizational challenges rebel leaders confront and then turn to the
factors that shape how individuals respond in the process of organizing
violence. The chapter concludes by explaining how and why I use the
cases of the National Resistance Army, Renamo, and two factions of the
Shining Path to illustrate my argument. "

Chapter 1

-   This book is focused on the processes through which organizations
    produce violence.

-   Dimensions of organization -- including resources, membership,
    authority structures, and internal rules -- move to the fore as
    explanations for the distinct strategies groups pursue.

-   Organizers of Revolution

    -   There is variation in the organizational capacity of different
        insurgencies -- variation that is essential to understanding how
        groups behave, yet is poorly accounted for in traditional
        studies of revolution and civil conflict.

    -   Common Principles

        -   First, groups employing guerrilla tactics rely on irregular
            forces organized in small and highly mobile units without
            heavy weaponry

        -   Second, strategies of guerilla warfare emphasize extended
            campaigns of assassination, sabotage, and hit-and-run
            attacks designed to impose significant costs on the enemy,
            rather than traditional battles that seek to defeat the
            opposition outright

        -   Third, guerilla forces typically operate in territories that
            are under the control of their military opponents

        -   Four, guerilla armies turn directly to local populations for
            the resources needed to sustain insurgency, including food,
            shelter, supplies, and intelligence

        -   Discussion of these in relation to Mao and Guevara

    -   Divergent Practices

        -   Similar philosophies of rebel organization adopted in
            diverse contexts give rise to a variety of organizational
            forms.

        -   Exames in Nepal, Sierra Leone, and the Congo

-   Theories of Rebellion: The Puzzling Absence of Organization

    -   The two dominant models that explain where rebellion takes place
        say surprisingly little about how it is organized. Both take
        organization as a given, focusing instead on the structural
        conditions that pave the way for rebellion to unfold.

        -   One approach treats rebel organizations as social movements
            that use violence

            -   Movements form as a consequence of rapid structural
                changes in a society and their differential impact on
                groups in the population

            -   Economic change gives rise to social discontent

            -   Conceptualize rebellion itself as the explosion of
                discontent from an aggrieved group (demand side)

            -   Ex: Where one region is looted by the central government
                for the benefit of others, that region will take up arms
                to seek independence

            -   Nature of the group that emerges to capitalize on
                grievance and opportunity (supply side)

                -   Demand side: Why rebellion occurs (similar
                    circumstances across rebellions)

                -   Supply side: What rebellion looks like, how it
                    operates (different across rebellions)

        -   The other treats rebel groups as if they were states

            -   Rebellion is the result of a security dilemma (a la
                Posner)

                -   Following the collapse of a central authority,
                    domestic groups compete for control so they can
                    protect their own interests

                -   The logic of the security dilemma makes no
                    predictions about how groups will organize to
                    protect their security; it simply suggests that they
                    will organize.

        -   "A coherent theory of why rebel groups choose the strategies
            they do depends, I argue, on a clear understanding of the
            micropolitics of rebellion, which is achieved by focusing on
            how groups organize violence -- on the choices rebel leaders
            make about how to recruit soldiers, groups' decisions about
            whether to centralize or decentralize command, and the
            structures movements set in place to ensure that foot
            soldiers act in accordance with objectives. Engaging
            civilians on the outside of a rebel group is a fundamental
            aspect of the micropolitics of rebellion, and thus the
            decisions leaders make about how to extract the resources
            they need to maintain their organizations, govern civilians
            who live in their areas of control, and discipline traitors
            who defect or attempt to defect to the side of the enemy all
            figure prominently in the study of how violence is
            organized."

-   Organizing Violence

    -   An economic approach to the study of rebel organization

        -   The assumption that individuals are rational and that their
            actions reflect deliberate decisions designed to maximize
            payoffs

        -   Economists design structures and strategies of organization
            that properly align incentives so that individual
            self-interest is harnessed for the broader goals of the
            organization. The emergence of different organizational
            structures and practices can be usefully viewed as a
            response to the incentive problems inherent in contracting
            relationships.

    -   Five Challenges of Rebel Organization

        -   **Recruitment** is the classic challenge of rebel
            organization and one to which the tools of economic analysis
            have already been applied

        -   **Control** emerges when rebel leaders turn from the task of
            recruiting members to managing their behavior

        -   **Governance**, strategies leaders choose in their
            relationships with noncombatants

        -   **Violence**, a powerful tool for influencing civilians and
            disciplining potential defectors

        -   **Resilience**, to be demonstrated in the changing
            circumstances rebel leaders confront without alienating
            their members and supporters

    -   Constraints on Strategy

        -   Economic endowments: resources that can be mobilized to
            finance the start-up and maintenance of a rebel organization

        -   Social endowments: distinctive identities and dense
            interpersonal networks that can be readily mobilized in
            support of collective action

-   The Origins of Constraints

    -   Material/natural resources v. external patron

-   Research Design and Data

    -   "My **dependent variable** -- the character and level of
        violence perpetrated by rebel groups against civilians -- is
        difficult to measure"

        -   Bless you Jeremy for telling us upfront!!! Other scholars,
            take a hint!!!

    -   Even though my **independent variable**, social and economic
        endowments, can be measured, the causal mechanisms described in
        this study (a set of organizational practices and structures)
        also pose challenges of measurement.

    -   Cases: The National Resistance Army, Renamo, and Sendero
        Luminoso

        -   Three similarities amongst differences

            -   First, all four groups faced a state apparatus
                sufficiently strong to finance a military more powerful
                than the incipient rebellion

            -   The groups also shared a similar objective: all sought
                to capture control of the central state and its
                resources.

            -   All four rebel groups emerged at a time of widening
                political opportunity

            -   [Where the four groups differ from one another most
                directly is with respect to the resources they could
                access in organizing rebellion]{.underline}

    -   The Data

        -   The principal strategy I employ in developing and building
            my argument is the analysis of participant accounts. Over
            the course of sixteen months of fieldwork in three
            countries, I conducted interviews with nearly two hundred
            rebel commanders, combatants, civilian supporters, and
            members of the government forces

        -   This study also draws on social histories of the violence in
            two formerly rebel-held communities within each country

        -   Quantitative information on the level and character of
            violence within each conflict provides a third source of
            data

Chapter 2 in a nutshell: "This chapter introduces the four rebel
organizations that emerged to fight these conflicts. It describes the
political environments where these groups formed, which were
characterized by the exclusion of southern ethnic groups in Uganda, of
central and northern groups in Mozambique, and of the rural peasantry in
Peru. It shows how the presence of the state and its role as a provider
of public goods was limited in the regions that provided shelter to the
rebel organizations. And it highlights the barriers that each group
faced as it considered launching a violent campaign. Four groups that
began on similar footings eventually took very different paths. With a
clearer understanding of the conditions that gave rise to insurgency in
Uganda, Mozambique, and Peru, we can turn in subsequent chapters to the
particular choices combatants made as they organized violence."

Chapter 2

-   The National Resistance Army: 27 Young Men

-   Renamo: The Gift of External Patronage

-   Sendero Luminoso Nacional: A Decade of Preparation (SLN)

-   Sendero Luminoso--Huallaga: On the Other Side of the Mountains
    (Sendero CRH)

-   Examining Rebels' Choices (which provides a nice summary since I
    don't have time to detail each these groups)

    -   The National Resistance Army, Renamo, Sendero Luminoso, and its
        regional committee in the Upper Huallaga Valley launched their
        insurgencies in similar contexts. All four groups emerged at a
        time of widening political opportunity. Each faced a regime in
        transition that was struggling to build its legitimacy among
        rural populations. In all four cases, the rebels grew stronger
        as the national military cracked down on peasants in response to
        the insurgency. And, like the insurgents led by Mao and Guevara,
        the rebel groups began as small, vulnerable movements with the
        dream of capturing state control.

    -   Two of the movements were resource-rich, one supported by
        external forces (Renamo) and another sitting on a veritable gold
        mine of illicit wealth (Sendero CRH). The other two were
        resource-poor, forced to capture weapons from the government and
        totally dependent on the civilian population for survival. In
        this context, one group turned to ethnicity and religion, the
        other to ideology. Both survived to wage a war, but neither ever
        managed to gain access to substantial financial resources. It is
        important to ask whether these differences in initial endowments
        matter (yes they do), how they shape the choices rebel leaders
        make as they organize, and in what ways they are linked to the
        different behaviors of rebel groups.

    -   The remainder of this book addresses these questions by looking
        comparatively at the key challenges of rebel organization:
        recruitment, management and organizational control, governance,
        the use of violence, and resilience in the face of rapid change.
        I begin by considering the first step in group formation: how to
        recruit men and women to fight.

For a book review that provides a great summary, please see:
https://doi.org/10.1080/14742830903234346
