
# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Does Oil Hinder Democracy
author(s): Michael L. #Ross
year: #y2001 
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Geography #Non-Democracy #Modernization #REGIMES 
keywords: #Quantitative 

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

Does Oil Hinder Democracy: Michael L. Ross (april 2001)

One explanation for the lack of democracies in the Middle East is that
oil rich economies somehow impede democratization. So Ross is testing
this with regression analysis. The analysis must prove that Oil is
somehow different from other extractive industries, or perhaps all
extractive industries bad for democracy. Or perhaps there is something
about the Middle East, apart from economy that is leading to a lack of
democracy.

The indicator for 'Oil reliance', is (fuel-exports/GDP)

The indicator for Mineral reliance, is a (non-fuel mineral exports/GDP)

The basic theory is that rentier states, rely on specific industries for
their wealth. So the normal modernization effect of economic growth is
not distributed elsewhere in the state.

Ross is trying to address two specific gaps in the literature. One is
the inclusion of Middle eastern States to the broader modernization
literature. Przeworski and Limongi are specifically avoiding including
these states in their analysis. There is a tendency to treat the middle
east as an outlier. Second, there is a body of literature that focuses
on understanding the 'resource curse', that countries with high levels
of resource wealth have low levels of economic development. And Ross
believes that the cause is the lack of democratization.

*The Rentier State*

These are states that have a large fraction of their revenues from
external rents. THat they are exporting something. There are two claims
about rentier states, 1. That wealth makes states less democratic, 2.
Wealth causes governments to do a worse job of promoting economic
development.

Ross wants to test the first claim with three empirical tests.

1.  Is there a statistical correlation between oil and authoritarianism?

2.  Can the claim be generalized beyond the middle east and beyond oil?

3.  If oil thwarts democracy, what is the mechanism?

*Causal Mechanisms*

The Rentier effect:

Also known as the taxation effect. Effectively if a state can rely on
several easily controlled natural resources then it never develops the
ability to tax its people. And therefore, the people don't feel
obligated to the state, and the state isn't accountable to them. There
is mixed qualitative evidence of this.

Another facet of a rentier state is the 'spending effect', where rich
countries have the ability to turn to patronage to avoid unrest. Spend
their wealth on the masses to avoid political concessions.

The last facet is the 'group formation' effect. Where the state uses
wealth to actively prevent opposition groups from gaining influence.

The Repression effect:

Maybe oil wealth is linked to repression. That citizens really want
democracy, but the government is spending on internal security, and the
militray. And using this assets to actively repress its populace. While
oil rich countries do have more military spending than average, it is
hard to claim that is is purely for repression. As they have a valuable
resource that other countries want.

The Modernization Effect:

In theory, modernization claims that, urbanization, rising education,
economic specialization, all lead to democracy. Basically, if oil wealth
does not produce any of these effects then we wouldn't expect democracy.

Results:

Column 1: the basic model

Column 2: a robustness test with one year lags on all explanatory
variables

Column 3/4: testing other commodities exports, food and nonfood
agriculture

Results from this Chart:

The effect of oil and minerals is substantial. Additionally, when total
income is small, then the effect of oil has a greater impact on regime
(0-10). The author does a number of robustness tests. Controlling for a
number of different factors, from Islam to Arab Peninsula, to Big/small
countries.

To Conclude: "They suggest the following: that a state\'s reliance on
either oil or mineral exports tends to make it less democratic; that
this effect is not caused by other types of primary exports; that it is
not limited to the Arabian Peninsula, to the Middle East, or to
sub-Saharan Africa; and that it is not limited to small states." (346)

*Causal mechanisms*

To test the rentier hypothesis, we need to look at taxation. Taxes
represents all internal revenue. Lower taxes result in less regime(more
authoritarian)

To test the spending effect, we need to look at government consumption.
What is the total spending by government and that should be correlated
with low regime.

To test the group effect, the theory goes that an independent civil
society cannot emerge if the government keeps growing to incorporate all
of that activity. Therefore the Government/GDP should be correlated with
low regime.

To summarize the findings, all of the rentier effects are correlated.

The Repression Effect:

To test this hypothesis, we are looking for a negative correlation with
military spending/gnp and regime. Military spending is much higher, and
correlated with oil and mineral wealth. And similarly military
personnel. And finally, looking at Ethnic tensions, that maybe countries
are investing in their militaries for other internal reasons. These
effects do not match the results of the test. There is no link between
these effects and regime. So these countries are spending on the
military, but don't have as many internal threats. So there is some
evidence for repression.

Modernization effect:

There are 11 different indicators looking at the aspects of
modernization theory. Lots of different types of enrollments, and
economic specializations.

Results:

Economic specialization is correlated with higher regime. But there is
little evidence it is affected by oil or mineral wealth. Education, life
expectancy, and urbanization are not significant.

So other modernization is valid, but the key mechanism is economic
specialization. Or, modernization is countered by domestic spending and
subsidies.

*Findings:*

1.  Oil wealth does hurt democracy

2.  Harmfulness of oil is not limited to just the middle east

3.  Mineral wealth also impedes democracy

4.  There is tentative support for all three causal mechanisms
