# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy
author(s): Daron #Acemoglu , James A. #Robinson
year: #y2005
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Development #REGIMES #Democracy  #Non-Democracy 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

#### First Summary

Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy

Acemoglu and Robinson

## Chapter 3: What Do We know about Democracy

This chapter is an overview of the existing research on democracy. So it
starts with an overview of the facts and concepts. And then they discuss
the differences in the theoretical approaches.

**Measuring Democracy**

Schumpeter's definition (1950): "The institutional arrangement for
arriving at political decisions in which individuals acquire the power
to decide by means of a competitive struggle for the people's vote."

So generally institutions that promote and secure 'free and fair
elections'.

The main 'measurement' for this is the Freedom House political rights
index. Which measures countries on a 1-7 scale (1 being the most
democratic). This index is only useful for countries in the post WWII
era.

Another index the Polity IV dataset measures countries from 1800 to the
present. (Scale of 1-10)

*Both of these indexes are considered to be continuous variables*,
though this is not without theoretical controversy.

**Patterns of Democracy**

-   Democracy has been expanding since WWII

-   OECD countries become democracy and "stay there" (47)

-   Rich countries tend to be democratic

    -   Though a lack of causal evidence about this relationship

    -   Pattern is diminishing recently

-   More educated countries tend to be democratic

**Democracy, Inequality, and Redistribution**

Some correlations exist:

-   The more redistributive a democracy, the more it tends to have a
    higher labor share. And societies with high labor shares tend to
    survive( the definition being lack of crisis??, definitely not using
    survive like IR) better than similar democracies with similar
    characteristics.

-   The higher share of tax revenue per GDP, the higher a country\'s
    democratic index.

The stories explaining democratic transitions (factors in the economic
and social spheres) in Britain, France, Germany, etc, in the 19th
century, give evidence to a causal relationship between more
redistributive economies and democracy.

**Crises and Democracy**

Transitions to democracy are more likely to occur during existing
economic and political crises. The authors claim a particular
relationship. That during these moments, *de facto* political power
becomes more durable *de jure* political power.

The death of democracy is also likely to happen during a crisis moment.
This is particularly likely during an economic crisis. (Defined as an
annual GDP Î” of -5%, in any one of the 5 previous years)

**Social Unrest and Democratization**

19th Century Europe

The revolutions of 1848 lead to a expansion of suffrage in much of
continental europe(Carl Note, which Europeans aren't continental Europe,
like Iceland ??). Specifically occurred in France, and German states.
Similarly in the late 19th and early 20th century, most of Europe had
expanded suffrage.

Some factors causing this:

-   Increasing urbanization lead to a much higher possibility of large
    scale social unrest.

-   Existing social unrest was mostly focused on economic and political
    inequalities

-   In this period there was a small change in inequality, but the rapid
    social changes to inequality only happen after the world wars.

Latin American Experience

Many examples of democracies emerging from dictatorships during a period
of economic crisis and social unrest. Venezuela(1948), Guatemala(1944),
El Salvador(1982). On the flip side, most of the dictatorships have
arisen from social unrest. Particularly right-wing military
dictatorships designed to protect the property holders from
redistribution.

Therefore, "In Latin America, democracy was forced on political elites
by the threat of revolution and by the collective action of the
disenfranchised. Moreover, once democracy was created elites often
wanted, and were frequently able, to mount coups to take back power."
(59)

During periods of democracies, societies experienced periods of economic
redistribution, and this trend ends under dictatorship.

**The Literature (Carl Note, They probably mention 20 authors, I feel
that I am hitting the high notes, but definitely a good 6 pages to look
at for a potential literature review)**

Modernization Theory, (Lipset, 1959) developed from the idea that as a
society modernizes its economy, it also becomes a democracy. This was
challenged by the idea that a country actually has 2 other paths,
socialism and fascism. (Moore 1966). Generally, this structuralist
argument is criticized in the 70s and 80s.

At this time, democracies were collapsing in the global south. So the
research shifts to the various factors that make a democracy work.
Adding in concepts like legitimacy, and democratic transitions.

Scholars are beginning to include prior regimes as a factor in
democratization. (Stepan 1986). Additionally, there begins to emerge
different types of democracy, and these typologies start to matter.

In the 1990s, scholars (Huntington) argue for different historical
phases of democracy. This explains the variation between democratization
in the 19th century, the early 20th, and the late 20th century.

On a parallel line of theory in the 1970s is the focus on incumbent
governments. (Dahl 1971) That democratization is a direct challenge to
the current governing system. So existing governments are forced to deal
with oppressing vs enfranchising parts of society to prevent unrest.
(Rationalistic) Governments are assessing the costs and benefits of
oppression and enfranchisement, and acting accordingly.

In the 1990s, this theoretical line of reasoning becomes integrated with
economic class and inequality. The state apparatus is responsible for
keeping the balance of power between the classes and maintaining order.
Therefore, when the working class develops, democratic institutions
emerge to maintain order.

**Our Contribution**

"We placed the issue of regime transitions within a framework of
redistributive conflict and developed the basic idea of democracy as a
credible commitment by the elite to avoid revolution\...Our research
provides the first systematic formal analysis of the creation and
consolidation of democracy." (65)

"Holding other things equal, a decrease in inequality make a highly
unequal society more like to democratize" (66)

## Chapter 

**Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy - Daron Acemoglu James
A. Robinson. (***Sasha: this chapter is packed with theoretical claims
which I outline here, but I omit all of their examples)*

Why are some countries democratic, while others are ruled by
dictatorships or other nondemocratic regimes?

-   Society as consisting of two groups, the elite and the citizens.
    Policies or social choices which benefit the elite will be different
    from those that benefit the citizens. So, there is a conflict. This
    conflict is the central theme of authors approach. The definition of
    elites can vary. It can be just relatively rich or specific ethnic
    group or specific professional status (military). Not surprisingly
    there is a close association between the elite and the rich.

-   In their model (based on game theory), they use the principle where
    one strives for a high degree of parsimony in formulating answers to
    complex questions.

-   [Definition of regimes]{.underline}: democracies generally
    approximate a situation of political equality relative to
    non-democracies which, in turn, represent the preferences of a much
    smaller subset of society (political inequality)

-   [Research question: Our focus in this book is to understand the
    social and economic forces]{.underline} pushing some societies
    towards regimes with greater political equality versus those
    encouraging the development of more nondemocratic systems. In other
    words, they interested in policies that move country in more
    democratic direction.

-   [Argument:]{.underline} Democracy, which is generally a situation of
    political equality, will look after the interests of the majority
    more than non-democracy, which is generally dominated by an elite
    and is more likely to look after their interests.

**Building Blocks of Our Approach**

1\. Although there are some other types of considerations authors
believe that economic considerations are more important. So they use
rational choice and game theory.

Accordingly, individuals have well-defined preferences over outcomes.
they evaluate various different options, including democracy vs.
nondemocracy, according to their assessments of their (economic and
social) consequences

Game theory is the study of situations with multiple decision-makers,
interacting strategically.

2\. Politics is inherently conflictual, which means that every policy
choice will create winners and losers. In addition, their argument
assumes that groups of individuals may be able to act collectively.
Consequently, political power is the capacity of a group to obtain its
favorite policies against the resistance of other groups.

They distinguish between two types of political power:

*[de facto political power]{.underline}*: is simply what a group can do
to other groups and the society at large by using force.

*[de jure political power:]{.underline}* is a power that allocated to
the group by political institutions

Actual political power is the combination of both

3\. Political institutions -- are social and political arrangements that
allocate de jure political power (e.g. electoral rule

In democracy, the majority will have relatively more de jure political
power than they do in nondemocracy. As a result, democracies look after
the interests of the majority of citizens more than nondemocracies.
Therefore, citizens have a stronger preference for democracy than the
elite.

**Towards Our Basic Story**

-   So, the majority of citizens should be on the side of democracy and
    the elite on the side of nondemocracy.

-   Citizens are more likely to secure a transition to democracy when
    they have more de facto political power.

-   This creates a **[very simple]{.underline}** *[theory of
    democratization]{.underline}*: the citizens want democracy and the
    elite want non- democracy, and the balance of political power
    between the two groups determines whether the society transits from
    nondemocracy to democracy (p.22)

-   However, this theory does not explain why citizens that have
    sufficient political power, don't use this power to simply obtain
    the social choices and policies that they prefer instead of fighting
    for democracy and then wait for democracy to deliver those policies
    to them. In practice, political institutions play a much more
    fundamental role. They regulate the future allocation of political
    power between various social groups. Individuals care not only about
    policies today but also about policies tomorrow.

**Our Theory of Democratization**

-   In nondemocracy even if citizens have de facto political power
    today, so they can obtain the policies they like, but they are
    unsure whether they will have the same political power tomorrow.
    Therefore, they use this power to increased their de jure political
    power in the future (because institutions are durable).

Elites give concession to majority only when they threaten with worse
(revolution) they can give promises to citizens about fair policies in
the future but those promises won't be credible. So the credible
commitment would be act where elites transfer part of their de jure
political power to majority to ensure future pro-majority policies.

-   **So [the theory sounds like this]{.underline}**: In nondemocracy,
    the elite have de jure political power and they will generally
    choose the policies that they most prefer. But nondemocracy
    sometimes challenged by the citizens who may pose a revolutionary
    threat -- when they temporarily have de facto political power. this
    de facto political power is *transitory* because it is hard to
    coordinate collective action so they can lose this power easily.
    They can use this power to undertake a revolution, and change the
    system to their benefit, creating massive losses to the elite, but
    also a large amount of collateral damage and social losses. The
    elite would like to prevent this outcome, and they can do so by
    making a credible *commitment to future pro-majority policies*. To
    do so they need to transfer formal political power to the majority,
    and this is what democratization achieves (p.26).

-   Democracy is usually not given by the elite It is demanded by the
    disenfranchised as a way to obtain political. In some case elites
    refuse to give democracy and they use violence to keep the status
    quo. Nevertheless, repression is both costly and risky for elites.
    Moreover, repression may fail and could cause a revolution.

**Democratic Consolidation -** Why some stay democratic and some revert
back

*democracy is consolidated* if the set of institutions which
characterize it endure through time.

If the military is on the side of the elite and there is sufficient
turbulence to allow a military takeover, the elite might support or
sponsor a coup to change the balance of power in society. Elites wants
to bring policies that give them the most power but they also want to
ensure future of this policies. Therefore, they have to abolish
democratic institutions.

**Determinants of Democracy**

[Civil Society]{.underline}

-   Democratization: Well organized citizens are able to create credible
    threat of revolution

-   Consolidation:Easier to resist attempts to revolt when you have
    stronger civil society

[Shocks and Crises]{.underline}

-   Democratization. Crises and macroeconomic shocks are intrinsically
    transitory and lead to short-term fluctuations in de facto political
    power. Therefore, it is an opening for democratization.

-   Consolidation. By the same logic coups are more likely to happen
    during crisis.

[Sources of Income and Composition of Wealth.]{.underline}

-   Democratization: Democratization will be more likely in a more
    industrialized society, where the elite own significant physical and
    human capital (because they are more threatened by turmoil), than a
    more agricultural one, where the elite are mainly land-owners (so
    they are more willing to use force to defend their property).

-   Consolidation: by the same logic coups are costlier for physical and
    human capital owners because they don't want any turmoil, while for
    land owners coups are less costly and more importantly democracy
    usually put higher tax on them then other systems.

[Political Institutions]{.underline}

-   Democratization: Although, democracy usually has higher power of
    majority compared to dictatorship, democratic political institutions
    can be structured to limit the power of the majority. When elites
    have this power to limit power of majority they will be less
    threatened by democracy so they have less incentives to use
    repressive tools which facilitates the process of democratization.

-   Consolidation: By the same logic institutions that limits power of
    majority make coups less likely. By this logic parliamentary
    democracies will be more stable than presidential since they have
    more checks on policy process.

In sum, increasing the power of the elite in democracy may promote
democracy, but giving the elite too much power will undermine it

[The Role of Inter-Group Inequality]{.underline}

-   Democratization: They suggest that the relationship between
    inter-group inequality and likelihood of democratization has an
    inverted U-shape. This means that the rise of inequality will
    increase the likelihood of democratization (more inequality more
    reasons for revolution) but only up to a certain point. After this
    point, the high inequality has a negative effect on likelihood of
    democratization because in society with high inequality elites have
    too much to lose so they have more incentives to go for repression.

-   Consolidation: Very equal societies never democratize in the first
    place. Higher, but still relatively low levels of inter-group
    inequality lead societies to democratize and once created democracy
    is consolidated because it is not too costly for the elites. Even
    higher levels of inequality still lead to democratization, but
    democracy does not consolidate because coups are more attractive.
    And for the highest levels of inequality, democracy is too costly
    for elites that they use repression to avoid it.

[Middle class]{.underline}

-   Democratization: Relatively affluent middle class ensures that
    policies installed by democratic regime will be closer to those the
    elite prefer (because middle class has more money). Tt is a *buffer*
    between elite and the citizens

-   Consolidation: same logic. Less threat to elite's interests so less
    reasons for coups

[Globalization]{.underline}

-   Democratization: financial integration means that capital owners,
    the elite, can more easily take their money out of a given country.
    This makes the elites feel more secure about democratic politics and
    discourage the use of repression.

In addition, Trade may reduce the gap between the incomes of labor and
capital owners, and thus change the extent of inequality between capital
owners and labor owners.

Here they make a point that is similar in structure to Rogowski's
economic approach. three factors determine the outcome: What kind of
capital is abundant in this country (labor or land), Political
identities, and where the country stands in the inverted U-shaped
relationship of intergroup-inequality. For instance, in the labor
abundant country with high inequality democratization won't happen
because inequality is too high and elites are to threatened by
redistributive policies. Therefore, increase in trade integration that
reduces this inequality promotes democratization. However, in land
abundant country where elites base their capital on land owning trade
integration may increase inequality (because all benefits go to land
owners) and therefore hinder democratization.

Globalization also can increase the costs of repression by applying
sanctions.

-   Consolidation: we can apply same logic and to receive either
    consolidation or likelihood of coups.

**Political Identities and the Nature of Conflict**

In the societies where we have political identities based on multiple
cross-cutting cleavages or race, ethnicity, religion or region there is
a low chance of broad coalition between groups. In turn this decreases
the chance of organized redistributive policy. This suggests that such
societies are more likely to have consolidated democracy since elites
would have little to fear from majority rule.

**Democracy in a Picture** -- in this chapter authors put the same ideas
in charts (*so if you understood everything you don't need this*)

Four 'paths' of political development

British path - fully consolidated democracy

Argentine path - unconsolidated democracy

Singapore - nondemocracy where the political status quo can be sustained
without serious repression

South Africa - nondemocracy with repression (until 1994)


Region A - the cost of repressing or mounting coups is irrelevant since
the poor are sufficiently contented under the political status quo not
to rock the boat

Region B - inequality is higher and revolution becomes a threat and cost
of repression is sufficiently high -\> democracy is created

Region C - inequality is high so that revolution is a threat but the
cost of repression is sufficiently low that democracy can be avoided

Figure 2.2 - For consolidation of democracy when the cost of coup is
zero, the rich are always willing to undertake a coup. Once created,
democracy will consolidate if it is not too redistributive and if coups
are sufficiently costly. However, when inequality is very high, the
costs of coups may be sufficiently low that a coup is attractive. This
is the case in region B where democracy is unconsolidated and here we
have placed Argentina.



Figure 2.3 - From the mid 1970's onwards, inequality fell in South
Africa, making democracy less threatening for the white elite. At the
same time the industrial sector rose at the expense of the agricultural
sector, and human and physical capital became more important. In terms
of the picture, this means that, at a given level of inequality, the
elite are less willing to repress. This moves the boundary between
region C and regions B and D downwards. Changes in the global
environment, particularly globalization, also have the effect of moving
the same boundary downwards. Thus between 1970 and 1994 South Africa
moved out of region C into region B, and democracy was created.


Figure 2.4 - What does the future hold for South Africa?

Since inequality is still very high, one might conjecture that South
Africa would be in Region B and therefore an unconsolidated democracy.
Nevertheless, the impact of the development of the South African
economy, the increasing importance of physical and human capital and the
increased globalization have the effect of moving the boundaries between
regions A and B to the right. Now, for a given cost of a coup,
inequality must be higher to justify mounting a coup against democracy.
Thus, while one cannot be certain of the future, one might hope that
South Africa had made a transition into Region A rather than region B.



#### Second Summary

[Chapter 1]{.underline}

-   Four main paths of political development

    -   Gradual shift from nondemocracy to consolidated, stable
        democracy (Britain)

    -   Democracy, once created, quickly collapses. Cycle repeats
        (Argentina)

    -   Remains undemocratic because society is egalitarian and
        prosperous, people are sufficiently satisfied (Singapore)

    -   Society is unequal and exploitative, democracy is so threatening
        to elites that all means are used to repress it (pre-Apartheid
        South Africa)

[Chapter 2]{.underline}

-   Question: What explains transition to democracy and the
    consolidation of some democracies but not others?

-   IV: Political outcome

    -   Binary: democracy/nondemocracy

-   DV: Underlying economic structures

<!-- -->

-   Society consists of two groups: elites and citizens

-   People have well-defined preferences that they understand

    -   Evaluate options (including democracy vs. nondemocracy) based on
        assessments of economic and social consequences (mostly
        economic)

-   Game theory can explain different regimes and regime transitions

-   Politics is inherently conflictual - every policy choice creates
    winners and losers

    -   Group with greater political power will get desired outcome

[Chapter 3]{.underline}

-   Overview of existing scholarship

-   Patterns of democracy

    -   Democracy has been expanding since WWII

    -   OECD countries become democracy and "stay there" (47)

    -   Rich countries tend to be democratic

        -   Though a lack of causal evidence about this relationship

        -   Pattern is diminishing recently

    -   More educated countries tend to be democratic

-   Democracy, inequality, and redistribution

    -   The more redistributive a democracy, the more likely to have a
        higher labor share and consolidate

    -   Higher share of tax revenue per GDP, higher a country's
        democratic index

-   Crises and democracy

    -   Evidence bears out argument in chapter 2 that democratization is
        more likely during times of crisis

-   Social unrest and democracy

    -   Democracy can be "forced" on elites by credible threat of
        revolution

-   "Our Contribution"

    -   "We placed the issue of regime transitions within a framework of
        redistributive conflict and developed the basic idea of
        democracy as a credible commitment by the elite to avoid
        revolution\...Our research provides the first systematic formal
        analysis of the creation and consolidation of democracy." (65)

    -   "Holding other things equal, a decrease in inequality make a
        highly unequal society more like to democratize" (66)

[Chapter 6]{.underline}

Holy \*\*\*. This chapter was a chore.

-   Democratization transfers political power to majority of citizens

-   But how do citizens gain political power in a nondemocracy?

    -   There exist different forms of political power, "not only vested
        in formal rules"

    -   Citizens could gain political power if they pose a credible
        threat of revolution or social unrest that damages the economic
        interests of elites


-   Political institutions are important to this process because they
    are durable - they will influence future allocations of political
    power

<!-- -->

-   Democratization arises when inequality is sufficiently high and the
    pro-citizen promises of elites are not sufficiently credible

    -   And when repression of citizens by elites is too costly

-   Other factors

    -   Power of elites to influence democracy

    -   Forms in which elites hold wealth

    -   Role of middle class

    -   More to be discussed later in book

[Chapter 8]{.underline}

-   Middle class as a third actor

    -   Can serve as buffer between rich and poor. At different times
        allying with one group or the other

-   Partial democracy transfers power from the rich to the middle class

    -   This explains why the vote is often first extended to the middle
        class and then the poor

-   Measure of inequality here is how rich a member of the middle class
    is relative to the rest of society

<!-- -->

-   In order to ensure lasting power, the middle class may endorse full
    democracy to incorporate the power as a counterbalance to the rick.

    -   Evidence supporting this is shaky

-   Full democratization is more likely when the poor are poor the
    middle class is relatively rich

<!-- -->

-   A large, affluent middle class makes democracy less costly for the
    rich, making coups less likely

<!-- -->

-   Conclusion

    -   Large, strong middle class can aid democratization because it is
        less radical than the poor, making democracy less unfavorable to
        the rich

    -   In the same way, it can aid in democratic consolidation, because
        democracy is not as costly to the rich, so coups are less
        attractive

[Chapter 11]{.underline}

-   Good summary of everything above and more - and it's only 10 pages
