# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies
author(s): Avner #GREIF 
year: #y1994
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Culture #Identity #Institutions #Development 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary


**[Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and
Theoretical Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist
Societies]{.underline}**

Abstract

Why do societies fail to adopt the institutional structure of more
economically successful one?

This paper integrates game theoretical and sociological concepts to
conduct a comparative historical analysis of the relations between
culture and institutional structure. structure. It examines cultural
factors that have led two premodern societies-one from the Muslim world
and the other from the Latin world-to evolve along distinct trajectories
of institutional structure. It indicates the theoretical importance of
culture in determining institutional structures, in leading to their
path dependence, and in forestalling successful intersociety adoption of
institution. the paper suggests the historical importance of

distinct cultures in economic development.

Cultural Norm→ Institution→Economic Development

1.  Introduction

<!-- -->

1)  Social psychologists have found societal organization to be highly
    correlated with per capita income in contemporary societies: most of
    the developing countries are \"collectivist,\" whereas the developed
    West is \"individualist.\"

2)  In collectivist societies the social structure is \"segregated\" in
    the sense that each individual socially and economically interacts
    mainly with members of a specific religious, ethnic, or familial
    group in which contract enforcement is achieved through \"informal\"
    economic and social institutions, and members of collectivist
    societies feel involved in the lives of other members of their
    group.

3)  In individualist societies the social structure is \"integrated\" in
    the sense that economic transactions are conducted among people from
    different groups and individuals shift frequently from one group to
    another. Contract enforcement is achieved mainly through specialized
    organizations such as the court, and self-reliance is highly valued.

4)  The theoretical and historical analyses indicate the importance of a
    specific cultural element-cultural beliefs-in being an integral part
    of institutions and in affecting the evolution and persistence of
    diverse societal organizations.

5)  The theoretical and historical analyses indicate the importance of a
    specific cultural element-cultural beliefs-in being an integral part
    of institutions and in affecting the evolution and persistence of
    diverse societal organizations.

II\. Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society

1)  specific subset of cultural beliefs, namely, rational cultural
    beliefs that capture individuals\' expectations with respect to
    actions that others will take in various contingencies. Hence this
    specific subset of cultural beliefs can be formalized as a set of
    probability distributions over an equilibrium strategy combination.
    Each probability distribution reflects the expectation of a player
    with respect to the actions that would be taken on and off the path
    of play.

2)  For example, different cultural beliefs may imply diverse social
    constructs-diverse social patterns of economic interactions-each of
    which entails different dynamics of wealth distribution. Different
    cultural beliefs may also imply different relations between
    efficiency and profitability in intra-society and intersociety
    economic interactions. Some cultural beliefs can render efficient
    intersociety relations unprofitable, leading to an economically
    inefficient social structure.

III\. Agency Relations and Cultural Beliefs

1\) The Maghribis and the Genoese faced a similar environment, employed
comparable naval technology, and traded in similar goods. The efficiency
of their trade depended, to a large extent, on their ability to mitigate
an organizational problem related to a specific

transaction, namely, the provision of the services required for handling
a merchant\'s goods abroad. A merchant could either provide these
services himself by traveling between trade centers or hire overseas
agents in trade centers abroad to handle his merchandise. Employing
agents was efficient, since it saved the time and risk of traveling,
allowed diversifying sales across trade centers, and so forth. Yet
without supporting institutions, agency relations could not be
established since an agent could embezzle the merchant\'s goods.
Anticipating this behavior, a merchant would not hire an agent to begin
with.

3)  To examine how each group mitigated the merchant-agent commitment
    problem, consider the following perfect and complete information
    One-Side Prisoner\'s Dilemma (OSPD) game, which captures the essence
    of the problem. (Extensions are discussed below.) There are M
    merchants and A agents in the economy, and (in accordance with the
    historical evidence) it is assumed that M \< A. In each period, an
    agent can be hired by only one merchant, and a merchant can employ
    only one agent.

4)  Matching is random, but a merchant can restrict the matching to a
    subset of the unemployed agents that contains the agents who,
    according to the information available to the merchant, have
    previously taken particular sequence of actions. A merchant who does
    not hire an agent receives a payoff of K \> 0. A merchant who hires
    an agent decides what wage (W \>=0) to offer the agent. An employed
    agent can decide whether to be honest or to cheat. If he is honest,
    the merchant\'s payoff is y(gross gain) - W. and the agent\'s payoff
    is W. and it is assumed that cooperation is efficient, y\> K + ∅u.
    The　merchant\'s wage offer is assumed credible, since in reality
    the agent held the goods and could determine the ex post allocation
    of gains. For that reason, if the agent cheats, the merchant\'s
    payoff is zero and the agent\'s payoff is a \> \'u. Finally, a
    merchant prefers receiving K over being cheated or paying W = ax,
    that is, K \> y - O.

5)  After the allocation of the payoffs, each merchant can decide
    whether to terminate his relations with his agent or not. There is a
    probability u, however, that a merchant is forced to terminate
    agency relations, and this assumption captures merchants\' limited
    ability to commit to future employment because of the need to shift
    commercial operations over places and goods and the high uncertainty
    of commerce and life during that period.

6)  honest agent an unemployed agent who was honest in the last period
    he was employed, and by Hh the probability that he will be hired in
    that period. Denote as a cheater an agent who cheated in the last
    period he was employed, and by h, the probability that he will be
    hired. Proposition 1, which is proved in the Appendix, specifies the
    minimum wage that supports cooperation.

7)  For a wage high enough, the difference between the present value of
    the lifetime expected utility of an unemployed and employed agent is
    higher than what an agent can gain by one-period play of cheating,
    and hence the agent\'s best response is to be honest. (Weird
    Calculation, in appendix)

8)  Under the individualist strategy, however, a merchant randomly hires
    an unemployed agent, whereas under the collectivist strategy a
    merchant randomly hires only from among the unemployed agents who
    have never cheated. An agent\'s strategy is to play honest if and
    only if he is offered at least the We relevant to him given the
    history of the game. Note that We is lower under the collectivist
    strategy. Each of these strategies is a subgame perfect equilibrium
    as established in proposition 2 (proved in the Appendix).

9)  PROPOSITION 2. Assume that under both the individualist and the
    collectivist strategy combinations y - K 2 W\*; then each strategy
    combination is a subgame perfect equilibrium of the OSPD game. Under
    the collectivist equilibrium, because each merchant expects

others not to employ a cheater, the perceived probability that a cheater
will be hired is lower than that of an honest agent. According to
proposition 1, this implies that a higher wage is required to keep him
honest, and hence the merchant strictly prefers to hire an honest agent.
The merchant\'s expectations are self-enforcing, although cheating does
not convey any information about future behavior; the agent\'s strategy
does not call for cheating any merchant who violates the collective
punishment; and merchants do not \"punish\" any merchant who hires a
cheater.

10) The analysis above assumed that the history of the game is common
    knowledge. Acquiring and transmitting information during the late
    medieval period were costly, and hence the model should incorporate
    a merchant\'s decisions to acquire costly information. Since
    merchants gathered information by being a part of an informal
    information sharing network, suppose that each merchant can either
    \"invest\" or \"not invest\" in \"getting attached\" to a network
    before the game begins, and his action is common knowledge.
    Investing requires paying A each period, in return for which the
    merchant learns the private histories of all the merchants who also
    invested.

11) PROPOSITION 3. W\*, is the minimum wage that merchant i has to pay
    his agent if only he does not invest; W\* is the equilibrium wage
    under the collectivist strategy in the full information game. Invest
    and the collectivist strategy is an equilibrium if W\* - WE 2 A. Not
    to invest and the individualist strategy is an equilibrium whereas
    invest and the individualist strategy is not an equilibrium.

12) Under a collectivist equilibrium, incomplete information reinforces
    investment in information. Under an individualist equilibrium, the
    value of information may still be zero (if the proportion of the bad
    type is high) or may not be high enough to induce investment in
    information (if the proportion of the bad type is low). Hence this
    paper uses the complete information model, which highlights the role
    of expectations with respect to actions and abstracts away from
    expectations with respect to types (see the discussion in Greif
    \[1989, 1993a\]).

IV\. The Maghribis and Genoese: Origin and Manifestations of Diverse
Cultural Beliefs

I skip this, relatively sparse information provided.

V. Within the Boundaries of the Game: Cultural Beliefs, Social Patterns
of Agency Relations,

and Wealth Distribution

1)  The first is a vertical social structure in which merchants find it
    optimal and therefore employ only agents, and hence an individual
    functions as either a merchant or an agent. The second is a
    horizontal social structure in which merchants employ only other
    merchants, and thus an individual functions as an agent and a
    merchant, providing and receiving agency services. What are the
    relations between cultural beliefs and these social patterns of
    agency relations?

2)  Intuitively, under collectivist cultural beliefs, a merchant\'s
    capital functions as a bond that reduces the optimal wage required
    to keep him honest. If a merchant cheats while functioning as an
    agent, he is no longer able to hire agents under the threat of
    collective punishment. Hence, cheating by a merchant while he
    functions as an agent reduces the future rate of return on his
    capital. This implies that a merchant who had cheated while
    functioning as an agent had to bear a cost that an agent (who cannot
    function as a merchant) would not have to bear. Hence a lower wage
    is required to keep a merchant honest, and each merchant is
    motivated to hire another merchant as his agent, leading to a
    horizontal social structure. This is not the case, however, under
    individualist cultural beliefs. Past cheating does not reduce the
    rate of return on a merchant\'s capital. But having capital to
    invest de facto increases a merchant\'s reservation utility relative
    to that of an agent, thereby increasing the wage required to keep
    him honest. Merchants are discouraged from hiring other merchants as
    their agents, leading to a vertical social structure.\'

3)  More formally, consider the optimal wage required to ensure the
    honesty of a merchant who functions as an agent (under the
    assumption that each merchant is risk neutral and has the discount
    factor A). The present value of the lifetime expected utility of the
    merchant if he is always honest is the sum of the present value of
    his expected utility from being an agent, Vh, and the present value
    of his expected utility from being a merchant, (-y - W\*)/(1 - B),
    that is, Vh + \[(y -W\*)/(l - B)\]. If this merchant cheats while
    providing agency services, the present value of his expected utility
    from being an agent is the sum of his current gain from cheating,
    ax, plus the lifetime expected utility of a cheater, Va. In
    addition, he receives from being a merchant in the current period
    -y - We plus the present value of the future periods\' expected
    utility from being a merchant who had cheated,V,. Hence the present
    value of his lifetime expected utility is a + y -- W\* + Vmc + Vac.
    For a merchant to be honest when providing agency services, he
    should not be able to gain from one period of cheating.

VI\. Transcending the Boundaries of the Game: Segregated and Integrated
Societies

1)  The Genoese responded in an \"integrated\" manner, but the Maghribis
    responded in a \"segregated\" manner. The Maghribis expanded their
    trade employing other Maghribis as agents. They emigrated from North
    Africa to other trade centers, and for generations the descendants
    of Maghribis continued to cooperate with the descendants of other
    Maghribis. When intereconomy agency relations become possible
    between a collectivist and an individualist economy, a collectivist
    merchant would not initiate intereconomy agency relations regardless
    of the uncertainty regarding the individualist merchants\'
    responses.28 The wage he has to pay to keep the agent honest is
    higher than the wage in the collectivist economy, since the
    collectivist economy\'s wage is lower than the individualist
    economy\'s wage. Hence collectivist cultural beliefs create a wedge
    between efficient and profitable agency relations and will be
    initiated by collectivist merchants only if efficiency gains from
    interagency relations are high enough. In contrast, because the
    collectivist economy\'s wage is lower, individualist merchants may
    find it optimal to establish inter economy relations even if such
    relations do not imply efficiency gains, thereby inducing
    (asymmetric) integration.

VII\. Transcending the Boundaries of the Game: Organizational Evolution

1)  Among the Genoese, individualist cultural beliefs led to an
    individualist society with a vertical and integrated social
    structure, a relatively low level of communication, and no economic
    self-enforcing collective punishment. In such a society a relatively
    low level of informal economic enforcement can be achieved because
    of the absence of economic self-enforcing collective punishment and
    networks for information transmission. Furthermore, the integrated
    social structure and the low level of communication hinder social
    and moral enforcement mechanisms. To support collective actions and
    to facilitate exchange, an individualist society needs to develop
    formal legal and political enforcement organizations.

2)  Yet it was the Genoese who developed formal organizations to support
    collective actions and exchange; the Maghribis did not develop such
    organizations and seem not to have used the ones available to them.
    During the twelfth century the Genoese ceased to use the ancient
    custom of entering contracts by a handshake and developed an
    extensive legal system for registration and enforcement of
    contracts. Furthermore, the customary contract law that governed the
    relations between Genoese traders was codified as permanent courts
    were established (Vitale 1955). In contrast, despite the existence
    of a well-developed Jewish communal court system, the Maghribis
    entered contracts informally, adopted an informal code of conduct,
    and at-tempted to resolve disputes informally.

3)  Genoese is consistent with this prediction. Among the Maghribis,
    compliance was assured through informal means. After the Muslim
    ruler of Sicily abused the rights of some Maghribi traders, the
    Maghribis responded by imposing, circa 1050, an embargo on Sicily.
    It was organized informally. Maymun ben Khalpha wrote a letter to
    Naharay ben Nissim of Fustat (old Cairo) from Palermo (Sicily), in
    which he informed Naharay about the abuse and asked him to \"hold
    the hands of our friends \[

VIII\. Conclusion

1)  Collectivist cultural beliefs constituted part of the Maghribis\'
    collective enforcement mechanism and induced investment in
    information, segregation, horizontal economic interactions, and a
    stable pattern of wealth distribution. The endogenous partition of
    society restricted economic and social interactions to a small group
    and further facilitated in-group communication and economic and
    social collective punishments. Collectivist cultural beliefs led to
    a societal organization based on the group\'s ability to use
    economic, social, and, most likely, moral sanctions against
    deviants. In contrast, individualist cultural beliefs constituted a
    part of the second-party enforcement mechanism of the Genoese and
    induced a low level of communication, a vertical social structure,
    economic and social integration, and wealth transfer to the
    relatively poor.
