
# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions Over Geography and Integration in Economic Development
author(s): Dani #Rodrik, Arvind #Subramanian, Francesco #Trebbi
year: #y2002
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Institutions #Development 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary




Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions Over Geography and
Integration in Economic Development

By: Dani Rodrik, Arvind Subramanian, Francesco Trebbi

Some of the factors that determine state income levels are: geography,
trade, and institutions. *This article claims that quality of
institution is by far the most significant.* They will determine this by
developing a method to 'control' for institution, and when that occurs,
the relevant effects of geography and trade, greatly diminish.

The central puzzle in this article is 'what determines a state's
income'. Three camps of theories.

1.  Geography: this focuses on climate, natural resources, agricultural
    productivity, and neighborhood

2.  Trade: do you have similarly trading neighbors? Does the state have
    the ability to maximize trade?

3.  Institutions: how well has a state incorporated property rights,
    rule of law, building 'social infrastructure'

It is likely that all three of these factors matter. Economic growth is
unlikely to only have one causal relationship. But the authors are
interested in testing which one is most important, and how do they
relate to each other.

The typical relationship looks like this:

1.  The most direct connection between geography and income, how
    productive is the territory?

2.  Is your territory easily about to integrate with the global economy?

3.  Does the territory lead to the development of market institutions?
    Or resource curse?

4.  The impact of integration on income level

5.  The impact of integration on institutions (are you in western
    europe?)

6.  Reverse causality between institutions and integration

7.  Reverse causality between income and integration

8.  The effect of market institutions leading toward incomes

9.  Or the Reverse of 8, and reverse causality

**SO Which of these effects is the most significant?**

One problem is reliable indicators. So they use two indicators to stand
in.

For Trade: they use a method (Frankel and Romer) that takes a state's
genetic indicators (size, distance from trade partners, geographic
factors) and generates an expected trade value.

For Institutions: they uses a method (Acemoglu et. al) That uses the
mortality rate of colonial settlers to determine institutional quality.
(I don't know how legit this is)

With these indicators, combined with the 'normal' ones, they test their
question: *"what is the independent contribution of these three sets of
deep determinants to the cross-national variation in income levels? The
first stage of these regressions provides us in turn with information
about the causal links among the determinants."(*135)

THEIR RESULTS:

Integration has no direct effect on incomes

Geography has weak direct effects

Property rights and rule of law have a positive effect. Which is
statistically significant

Institution quality have a large positive effect on integration.

"Our estimates indicate that an increase in institutional quality of one
standard deviation,\...roughly \...difference between measured
institutional quality in Bolivia and South Korea, produces\...a 6.4-
fold difference - which, not coincidentally, is also roughly the income
difference between the two countries." (136)

They use 3 different samples. A 64 country sample, a 79 country sample,
and a 137 country sample. They can only use the institutional quality
instrument with the 64 and 79 country samples.



Even with 137 country sample, the effects of institutions are large.
However, so is distance from the equator. So they want to check for
covariance. And once you control for institutions, the effect from
geography is much less impactful.

"Once the institutional variable is added, geography and openness do not
have any additional power in explaining development. Institutions trump
geography and openness." (141)

They also test for the interrelationship between institutions and
integration in world trade. They use a large regression analysis, trying
to account for a number of factors. They determine:

"The much greater impact of institutions is the consequence of four
factors:

\(i\) the estimated direct effect of institutions on incomes is positive
and large;

\(ii\) the estimated direct effect of trade on incomes is negative (but
statistically insignificant);

\(iii\) the estimated indirect effect of trade on institutions is
positive, but small and statistically insignificant; and

\(iv\) the estimated indirect effect of institutions on trade is large
and statistically significant because of (ii)."(146)

Next they look at the specific factors that determine income. They look
at physical feature, human capital per worker, and total productivity.
And identity how those factors are influenced by institutions, trade,
and geography.

They conclude that integration and geography do not have an impact. But
institutions have a large impact.

**Robustness check**

They do an number of checks. They determine that regional factors do not
drive the results. They determine that additional cultural factors, such
as religion/identity of the colonizer/legal origin, also do not drive
the results. They also add a number of additional geographic indicators,
and determine that they do not drive the results. The only thing that
isn't significant is oil wealth.

**Conclusion, What Does it all mean? (153)**

**3.1** They claim that they have gone beyond Acemoglu et al. in their
analysis. That they have used larger sample sizes and tested for trade.
BUT, despite testing and concluding, they are not making a full theory.
Acemoglu et al. claim and prove that the institutional legacy from
colonization has a dramatic impact on the wealth of the country. But
that is not a complete explanation for income differences between
countries in the abstract. It is a piece in the causal story of income.
They authors of this paper, also don't claim to have a full theory. The
indicator 'settler mortality' is a nice instrument to represent colonial
legacy, but it is a very incomplete indicator to represent institutions.

**3.2** Institutions don't imply good policy. Simply having rule of law
doesn't guarantee a state to have an effective economic policy.
Different states have different policies on economic growth, and those
factors should be incorporated into a broader conception of how
institutions work.

To conclude: Institutions are the driving force behind economic growth.
And there is more work necessary to understand how they actually work
inside the state itself.
