# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution
author(s): Daron #Acemoglu, Simon #Johnson and James A. #Robinson
year: #y2002
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Institutions #Development 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

### First Summary

**Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the
Modern World Income Distribution**. By Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson and James A.
Robinson (2002).

**Short summary of their argument (taken from conclusion)**:

They show that countries that were wealthy in 1500 today are poor while
country that were poor are wealthy. Their geography did not change so
geographic circumstances cannot explain the reversal in the wealth. But
change in institutions (due to colonial invasion) can explain the
difference in their wealth today. They are countering the geographic
hypothesis

-   [In]{.underline} prosperous and densely settled areas, Europeans
    introduced or maintained already-existing [extractive
    institutions]{.underline} to force the local population to work in
    mines and plantations, and took over existing tax and tribute
    systems.

-   In contrast, in previously sparsely settled areas, Europeans settled
    in large numbers and created institutions of [private
    property]{.underline}, providing secure property rights to a broad
    cross section of the society and encouraging commerce and industry.

-   While societies with extractive institutions or those with highly
    hierarchical structures could exploit available agricultural
    technologies relatively effectively, the spread of industrial
    technology required the participation of a broad cross section of
    the society: the smallholders, the middle class, and the
    entrepreneurs. The age of industry, therefore, created a
    considerable advantage for societies with institutions of private
    property.

**How they prove their argument**

-   [Main measure of economic prosperity in 1500]{.underline}:
    **Urbanization** and **population density** (only relatively
    prosperous areas could support dense population and urban life).

-   Figure 1 and 2 indicate a negative relationship between wealth in
    1500 and 1995.

The results remain robust even when they control for the identity of the
colonial power, religion, distance from the equator, temperature,
humidity, resources, and whether the country is landlocked, and when we
exclude the United States, Canada, New Zealand, and Australia.

Figure 1. GDP PPP in 1995 v. Urbanization in 1500



Figure 2. GDP PPP in 1995 v. Population density in 1500


**[Geography hypothesis:]{.underline}**

-   Simple: Most of the differences in economic prosperity can be
    explained by geographic, climatic, or ecological differences across
    countries.

-   More sophisticated: "

    -   "the temperate drift hypothesis" - certain geographic
        characteristics that were not useful, or even harmful, for
        successful economic performance in 1500 may turn out to be
        beneficial later on.

    -   Presence of coal reserves or easy access to the sea, facilitated
        industrialization

**Authors reject all of those.**

**[However]{.underline}**, they agree that geography played role in
following:

-   Europeans settled in large numbers in the areas where malaria and
    yellow fever were less present which is a geographic argument.

-   Economic prosperity in 1500 may be reflecting geographic factors
    (e.g., that the tropics were more productive than temperate areas).

**Instead they provide institutional explanation:**

-   Clusters of institutions ensuring secure [property
    rights]{.underline} for a broad cross section of society are
    essential for investment incentives and successful economic
    performance.

-   In contrast, extractive institutions, which concentrate power in the
    hands of a small elite and create a high risk of expropriation for
    the majority of the population, are likely to discourage investment
    and economic development.

-   European colonialism led to the development of institutions of
    private property in previously poor areas, while introducing
    extractive institutions or maintaining existing extractive
    institutions in previously prosperous places.

-   Institutional differences matter more when new technologies that
    require investments from a broad cross section of the society become
    available. Therefore, good institutions provide more allow to take
    advantage of opportunities to industrialize.

-   The absence of the extractive institutions in poor areas in 1500 can
    be explained by the relative backwardness of these areas, European
    powers did not view them as valuable colonies.

*Sasha -- from this point it will be a lot of charts and tables that
will support their claim. No new theoretical argument no new arguments.*

**Urbanization and population density measurements**

-   The Bottom line of this section there is positive association
    between Urbanization and GDP per capita. Even with controlling
    variables (Tables 2, 3 and figure 3)

-   Urbanization in 1500 has significant negative effect on GDP per
    capita (PPP) in 1995 consistently for all the models. Even when we
    add geographic variables, resources or continent dummies (Table 5).

Cross-sectional regression between urbanization and log of GDP per
capita.

Figure 3. Log GDP per Capita (PPP) in 1995 against the Urbanization Rate

Results with Urbanization

**Results with Population Density**

The empirical evidence regarding the relationship between population
density and income is less clear-cut. Authors argue that it is ok to
treat Population density as a proxy for GDP per capita for 1500 but not
for 1995.

Regression of income per capita 1995 on population density in 1500

**The Timing and Nature of the Reversal**

[General argument of the authors]{.underline}: that the reversal in
relative incomes took place during the late eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries and was linked to industrialization.

-   Figure 4a shows that the reversal is mostly a late **[eighteenth-
    and early nineteenth-century]{.underline}** phenomenon, and is
    closely related to industrialization.

-   Figure 4b indicates per capita industrial production in 1750 was in
    fact higher in India, 7, then in the United States. In 1750 China
    had industrial production per capita twice the level of United
    states. Over the next 200 years there was a much larger increase in
    industrial production in the United States than in India (and also
    than in China).

Figure 4a: Urbanization Rate in India, the United States, and New World
Countries with Low and High Urbanization, 800-1920


Figure 4b. Industrial Production per Capita, 1750-1953

**The Geography Hypothesis -- Basically they reject everything**

-   Their evidence rejects [simple geographic hypothesis]{.underline}
    (Based on the tables that were presented earlier)

-   Then they reject the [\"temperate drift hypothesis".]{.underline}
    The temperate drift hypothesis suggests that the reversal of the
    income should be associated with the spread of European agricultural
    technologies. Yet in practice, while European agricultural
    technology spread to the colonies between the sixteenth and
    eighteenth centuries, while the reversal in relative incomes is
    largely a late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century, and
    industry-based phenomenon (p. 1261).

-   Then they reject that [certain geographic characteristics facilitate
    or enable industrialization]{.underline}.

First, they claim that access to the see is not good explanation since
some. The is no clear evidence form the data. Also, some inland based
colonies failed to develop.

-   They reject the hypothesis regarding the [lack certain
    resources]{.underline} (like coal) which may have been necessary for
    industrialization. They incorporated resources as a control variable
    and results does not support this claim.

**[However]{.underline}**, they agree that geography played role in
following:

-   European settled in large number in the areas where malaria and
    yellow fever were less present which is geographic argument.

-   Economic prosperity in 1500 may be reflecting geographic factors
    (e.g., that the tropics were more productive than temperate areas).

**The Institutions Hypothesis**

-   Institutions hypothesis suggests that societies that are prosperous
    today should tend to be prosperous in the future unless they
    experience exogenous shock. European colonialism not only disrupted
    existing social organizations, but led to the establishment of, or
    continuation of already existing, extractive institutions in
    previously prosperous areas and to the development of institutions
    of private property in previously poor areas. Therefore, European
    colonialism led to an institutional reversal.

-   Good organization of society corresponds to a cluster of (political,
    economic, and social) institutions ensuring that a broad cross
    section of society (not only elites) has effective property rights
    -- *[institutions of private property]{.underline}*.

-   *[Extractive institutions]{.underline}* - where the majority of the
    population faces a high risk of expropriation and holdup by the
    government, the ruling elite, or other agents (high concentration of
    political power in the hands of a few).

What determined which institutions were established:

1\. The economic profitability of alternative policies.

-   Extractive institutions were established when there were plenty of
    labor force (high population density)

2\. Whether Europeans could settle or not. Europeans could easily settle
in large numbers in sparsely inhabited areas.

In this table we can see there operantionalization of private property
rights institutions

From the table: negative relations between measures of prosperity in
1500 (urbanization and population density) and institutions nowadays.
Basically, this means that the better you were in 1500 the worse
institutions you have nowadays.

**V. Institutions and the making of the modern world income
distribution.**

**V.A. Institutions and the Reversal**

*Sasha: I have to admit I could not understand their logic in this
section.*

The bottom line of their argument here is that institutions have a full
mediation effect for the association between urbanizations and
population density in 1500 and GDP per capita in 1995 (pp.1269-1271).

**V.B. Institutions and Industrialization**

-   Wither the country has extractive or good institutions will meter
    more when the new technology arrives

    -   Elites may not want to invest in new technology or even they may
        block new technology because it threatens them

    -   Early industrialization requires investments from large number
        of people

    -   Industrialization need new entrepreneurs who will be free and
        able to bet on new technologies

To test their hypothesis, they use U. K. industrial output as a proxy
for the opportunity to industrialize, since during this period the
United Kingdom was the world industrial leader.

Since the first line (interaction between U.K. industrialization and
institutions) remained significant through all the models they argue
that overall, the results provide support for the view that institutions
played an important role in the process of economic growth and in the
surge of industrialization among the formerly poor colonies, and via
this channel, account for a significant fraction of current income
differences.


### Second Summary

*Most of this is directly from the text*

**Key Takeaways:**

-   ﻿Countries with better "institutions" have more secure property
    rights, and less distortionary policies will invest in physical and
    human capital, and will use these factors more efficiently to
    achieve a greater level of income

-   Colonies where Europeans faced higher mortality rates are today
    substantially poorer than colonies that where healthy for Europeans.
    This relationship reflects the effect of settler mortality working
    through the institutions brought by Europeans.

-   Settler mortality rates were a major determinant of settlements;
    settlements were a major determinant of early institutions; and
    there is a strong correlation between early institutions and
    institutions today

-   Specifically, in their theory and data it is not the identity of the
    colonizer or legal origin that matters, but whether European
    colonialists could safely settle in a particular location: where
    they could not settle, they created worse institutions.

-   Author hypothesizes that settler mortality affected settlements

-   There are a number of economic mechanisms that will lead to
    institutional persistence

    -   Restrictions on government power and enforce property rights

    -   Size of ruling elite

    -   Agents making irreversible investment that are complementary to
        a particular set of institutions

-   Malaria and yellow fever were the major sources of European
    mortality in the colonies

-   Differences in colonial experience could be a source of exogenous
    differences in institutions

-   Europeans adopted very different colonization strategies, with
    different associated institutions.

-   The colonization strategy was in part determined by the feasibility
    of European settlement

-   Early institutions persisted to the present
