# Metadata
## Identifiers
title:  Missing in Action: Teacher and Health Worker Absence in Developing
Countries
author(s): Nazmul #Chaudhury, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan
and F. Halsey Rogers 
year: #y2006
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Welfare #Public_Sector
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

Missing in Action: Teacher and Health Worker Absence in Developing
Countries

Nazmul Chaudhury, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan
and F. Halsey Rogers (2006)

Sorry, no time for photos (but this would be way too many to do anyways)

Abstract

In this paper, we report results from surveys in which enumerators made
unannounced visits to primary schools and health clinics in Bangladesh,
Ecuador, India, Indonesia, Peru and Uganda and recorded whether they
found teachers and health workers in the facilities. Averaging across
the countries, about 19 percent of teachers and 35 percent of health
workers were absent, as shown in Table 1. The survey focused on whether
providers were present in their facilities, but since many providers who
were at their facilities were not working, even these figures may
present too favorable a picture. For example, in India, one-quarter of
government primary school teachers were absent from school, but only
about one-half of the teachers were actually teaching when enumerators
arrived at the schools.

We find that absence rates are generally higher in poorer regions.
Absence is typically fairly widespread, rather than being concentrated
on a small number of "ghost" workers. Higher-ranking and more powerful
providers, such as headmasters and doctors, are absent more often than
lower-ranking ones; for example, averag- ing across countries, 39
percent of doctors were absent, while only 31 percent of other health
workers were absent. Men are absent more often than women. Teachers from
the local area are absent less often. There is little evidence that pay
strongly affects absence (at least in the range of pay where we have
data); by contrast, we do find evidence suggesting a role for the
quality of infrastructure at the facility. This finding is consistent
with the idea that teachers and health workers are extremely unlikely to
be fired for absence, but that their decisions about whether to go to
work are influenced by the working conditions they face. Contract
teachers, who are not subject to civil service protection and earn a
fraction of what civil service teachers earn, do not have lower absence
rates. In India, we also examine absence rates among teachers in rural
private schools and in locally managed nonformal education centers.
Absence rates are high among these teachers as well, although private
school teachers have lower absence than public teachers in the same
village.

Much recent discussion of economic development revolves around the role
of institutions. Much of this discussion focuses on property rights
institutions, but it also seems possible that weak institutions for
supplying public goods---education and health in particular---are a
significant barrier to economic development in many countries.

**So from what I skimmed, it doesn't seem like the authors are testing
whether one specific IV is affecting one or more DVs. Instead, they're
testing a lot of stuff and see what is significant and what isn't. Since
this is more of exploratory analysis, I'm just going to paste the
correlation tables below.**

