# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: THE DIGITAL PROVIDE: INFORMATION (TECHNOLOGY), MARKET PERFORMANCE, AND WELFARE IN THE SOUTH INDIAN FISHERIES SECTOR
author(s): ROBERT #JENSEN 
year: #y2007
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Welfare #ICT #India
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary




**THE DIGITAL PROVIDE: INFORMATION (TECHNOLOGY), MARKET PERFORMANCE, AND
WELFARE IN THE SOUTH INDIAN FISHERIES SECTOR, ROBERT JENSEN 2007**

**Abstract**

When information is limited or costly, agents are unable to engage in
optimal arbitrage. Excess price dispersion across markets can arise, and
goods may not be allocated efficiently. In this setting, information
technologies may improve market performance and increase welfare.
Between 1997 and 2001, mobile phone service was introduced throughout
Kerala, a state in India with a large fishing industry. Using microlevel
survey data, we show that the adoption of mobile phones by fishermen and
wholesalers was associated with a dramatic reduction in price
dispersion, the complete elimination of waste, and near-perfect
adherence to the Law of One Price. Both consumer and producer welfare
increased.

**Introduction**

Law of One Price (LOP) (i.e., the price of a good should not differ
between any two markets by more than the transport cost between
them).Yet despite the fact that information is both central to economic
theory yet so limited in reality, there are few empirical studies
assessing the effects of improvements in information. In this paper, we
examine these questions by exploiting the introduction of mobile phones
in the Indian state of Kerala as a natural experiment of improved market
information. technologies (ICTs) for economic development. Many critics
argue that investments in ICTs should not be a priority for low-income
countries, given more basic needs in areas such as nutrition, health,
and education. However, this argument over looks the fact that the
functioning of output markets plays a central role in determining the
incomes of the significant fraction of households engaged in
agriculture, forestry, or fisheries production in low-income countries.
However, while there is some macrolevel evidence that ICTs promote
economic growth \[Roller and Waverman 2001\], the microlevel evidence
has been purely anecdotal. Thus, the case of mobile phones in Kerala
will also allow us to examine whether ICTs can play a role in promoting
welfare in developing countries; while much has been written about how
the uneven spread of ICTs has created a "digital divide" between rich
and poor countries, considerably less is known about the benefits
(Digital Provide ) such technologies can provide the latter.

Over one million people are directly employed in the fisheries sector
and over 70 percent of adults eat fish at least once a day

**Finding**

We find that price dispersion was dramatically reduced with the
introduction of mobile phones. The mean coefficient of variation of
price across markets (the standard deviation divided by the mean)
declined from 60--70 to15 percent or less. In addition, there were also
almost no violations of the Law of One Price once mobile phones were in
place, compared to 50--60 percent of market pairs before. Further,
waste, averaging 5--8 percent of daily catch before mobile phones, was
eliminated. Overall, the fisheries sector was transformed from a
collection of essentially autarkic fishing markets to a state of nearly
perfect spatial arbitrage. In addition, fishermen's profits increased on
average by 8 percent while the consumer price declined by 4 percent and
consumer surplus in sardine consumption increased by 6 percent.

**Data and Empirical Strategy**

We conducted a weekly survey of 300 sardine fishing units15 throughout 3
northern districts of Kerala region of study on Tuesdays of every week
from September 3, 1996, to May 29, 2001. We first chose fifteen of
approximately thirty-five beach markets (which also serve as the ports
or "landings" for the fishing units) throughout the districts, selected
so that there was one market, on average, every fifteen kilometers.
Within each landing, we made a census of all sardine fishing units and
then randomly chose ten large (twenty-eight feet or above) and ten small
units. Interviewed in the afternoon regarding that morning's market,
each fishing unit was asked for amount of fish caught, market of sale,
quantity sold, sale price, time of sale, costs, and whether they used a
mobile phone. Fishermen were also asked for wind and sea conditions
(calm, mild, severe) and approximate fishing location (indicated on a
map).

**Result**

In region I in period 1, the mean spread declined to 1.86 Rs/kg, while
declining only slightly in the other two regions (Positive Externality).

Rest of the paper, explain why alternative factors such as economic
growth endogenized by introduction of ICT, may affect the pattern of
fishing consumption and thus, demand for fish increased and waste of
fish decreased and price variation flatten, was not true. Robert
attempted to undermine alternative explanation to increase the validity
of natural experiment. (At least economic growth alternative explanation
was interesting but seemingly less important, you could skip these
sections IV B, C and II includes esoteric econometrics).

