# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Blood and Debt: War and Taxation in Nineteenth-Century Latin America
author(s): Miguel Angel #Centeno 
year: #y1997
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s):  #STATE #Latin_America
keywords: #comparative_case 

## Body

from: 
cohort:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

### First Summary

The purpose of this article is the challenge the claim that war has a
positive relationship with state capacity. But rather, "Without the
prior establishment of political authority and without a link between
such an organization and social actors, war will not contribute to
institutional development". (1565)

Intro:

Charles Tilly has best summarized the relationship between war and the
state. That "war made the state and the state made war". (1565) However,
this statement and much of the analysis on war and state capacity is
eurocentric. Centeno challenges this claim by looking at state
development and war in Latin America. During 1810-1830, 16 independent
nations arose and attempted to develop into modern states. These states
were often plagued by war and civil war. By comparing these cases with
European cases, the author is trying to explain the variation between
their development.

European Paradigm:

The standard understanding of the relationship between war and
state-capacity is called the extraction-coercion cycle. That the state
requires capital to successfully fund and pay back loans required for
fighting a war. Then the state creates both economic and political
institutions to finance that capital.

A gauge of strength:

Taxation, and tax data becomes the indicators for determining a state's
capacity. Taxes require a central authority to have the ability enforce
rules on the population. War, because of its drain on resources, becomes
the catalyst for the state to develop the tools necessary for taxation.
This 'story' is taken directly from Europe and the US. It is relatively
easy for a state to collect customs taxes, that merely requires soldiers
at all major ports. But it is much more difficult to collect taxes from
the general populace. That requires a state to have a monopoly on
authority throughout its entire territory.

Challenging the paradigm:

Centeno's central point is that this relationship is not automatic. That
wars only built some states, and only some states were built by wars.
Looking at the Latin American examples, it suggests that there are three
critical prerequisites for institutional development to be aided by war:
(1569)

1.  States must be forced to turn *inward* in order to meet the
    financial challenges

2.  Adequate administrative mechanisms must be in place first

3.  The central authority must have established sovereignty over its
    territory, else it will not be supported by local actors.

Therefore, to answer the question, 'What came first, the State or war?'
Latin american examples suggest that Wars in and of themselves cannot
make anything. Wars provide an opportunity for existing political
organizations to capitalize. Additionally, Taxation and conscription
cannot occur simply because there is a political organization. They
require by-in from existing social elites, and a population willing to
accept these demands.

Latin American Wars:

Many of these countries were engaged in numerous wars, yet even in the
most successful countries revenue per-capita failed to be comparable
with european countries. Additionally, much more of Latin American
taxation was from Customs rather than from revenues.

Therefore, wars were not creating a large increase in government
capacity. Customs and royalties from exports were still the dominant
sources of revenue. These taxes did not require a large expansion of
government authority.

Explaining the Latin American Pattern

1.  Latin States had alternative sources of revenue beyond coercive
    extraction

2.  Latin American states were not politically structured to be able to
    exploit war

3.  Latin American States were never able to create internal unity, even
    in the face of military threat

Artificial Wealth

First many of these states were extremely poor societies. Much of their
wealth came from extractive industries. Meaning that states didn't have
internal sources of wealth to draw on. Therefore, universally, they
simply printed money. That was the main source of funding for their
militaries. In addition to printing money, they borrowed heavily from
domestic and international sources. These decisions are consistent with
European countries, yet the Latin American countries continued to be
reliant upon international loans rather than turning inward. This is due
to the nature of their economies. Most of which were based upon
exporting commodities. This allowed for relatively easy taxation at
ports. And if you have an infrastructure for taxation at ports, it is
easy to set up customs taxes. This does not lead to a expansion of
national authority.

Timing is Everything

Many of the Latin American states were declaring independence from the
spanish colonial system. It would have been very difficult for new
governments to throw off the spanish chains and demand new taxes.
Further, the spanish colonial system was brutal but ineffective. Orders
from the capitals were rarely followed and needed to continually
enforced. There was no existing infrastructure for new leaders to build
upon. Then the wars of independence were particularly brutal and
destructive, further fraying institutions.

"The Uruguayan state might be the most extreme example of political
fragility. The very concept of a state seems a misnomer for an entity
lacking budgets, an accepted currency, or the capacity to maintain order
even in its own capital."(1591)

In many ways the military was the state. They consumed the majority of
the resources. But that military was not controlled by the central
authority. This lead to the rise of militias created to protect local
property, and serving property owners. States fought their own citizens
as much as their enemies.

The Hollow State

The wars of independence occurred when the spanish crown lost power and
legitimacy, but not due to internal changes in society. Taxes were
regularly avoided when the state did not have the power to directly
enforce. Throughout the various wars, elites did not see the outcome as
a direct challenge to their social status. Why did it matter of the
state lost a war? These capital holding elites were not integrated into
the state, and did not feel an incentive to give up any resources.

Blood and Debt

Rather than creating European states comprised of 'blood and iron',
Latin american states ended up being comprised of blood and debt.(1595)
These countries ended up being integrated into the international economy
primarily with extractive commodities. Rarely did societies coalesce to
the point where they had collective national interests. And states
rarely had sovereignty over their territory.


### Second Summary

Blood and Debt: War and the Nation-State in Latin America
(2002)

Miguel Angel Ceteno, Professor of Sociology and International Affairs

[[https://wws.princeton.edu/faculty-research/faculty/cenmiga]{.underline}](https://wws.princeton.edu/faculty-research/faculty/cenmiga)

Book in a nutshell: Eurocentric model that wars make states (Tilly)
isn't fully applicable to Latin America (excluding Central America).
Unlike Western Europe, Latin America fought limited-scale wars (not
total), civil wars (rather than against neighbors), and largely assumed
the post-colonial boundaries it inherited. Thus, warfare was unable to
strengthen states' internal apparatus and outward legitimacy. This has
resulted in Latin American states that cannot project power and
productivity like their European counterparts.

Chapter 1: The Latin American Puzzle

-   Misnomer that Latin America is dominated by the state, a Leviathan
    lurks over the region, and the continent has been hampered by state
    violence

-   Instead, these states have often been unable to establish their
    institutional autonomy, provide social services, raise sufficient
    internal revenue, create a national identity, etc. This is
    contrasted with the development of nation-states in Europe
    post-Westphalia

-   The exception to lack of state power often comes in the economic
    realm

-   See p. 23 for a comparison of bellic models, which nicely outlines
    Centeno's argument

Chapter 2: Making War

-   Nature of war on the continent is a legacy of colonialism, borders
    today largely reflect the same borders (and the same states) that
    were born after independence

    -   Wars of independence less fueled by national identity, more
        about the decay of the Spanish empire and its inability to
        properly administer its empire

-   Wars in Latin America (outside a few examples of notable conflicts)
    have not been one state invading another for territorial/ideological
    ambitions, but internal strife, due to the state unable to flex is
    power/legitimacy beyond the national capital

    -   For a contrast to European state development, consider the
        Thirty-Years War, wars of succession (Austrian, Spanish), and
        Napoleonic Wars (to some extent)

-   Latin America exists in a "peaceful embrace", where class
    structures, ununified elites, undeveloped administrative capacities
    of the state, and reliance on European powers shaped the
    limited-wars and relative peace on the continent

    -   TLDR; States in the region didn't develop institutions that were
        capable of managing wars, which in turn meant war didn't
        strengthen the state

-   See the chapter for the various cases Centeno uses to demonstrate
    this

Chapter 3: Making the State

-   Limited cases (Chile v. Bolivia/Peru in the 1830s, etc.) where war
    allowed growth of the state and increased its
    capabilities/efficiency

-   Limited wars never required states to adopt massive conscription

-   The availability of external funding never required the state to
    finance the war through heavy taxation, thus states developed
    without a population used to being taxed heavily (unlike Europe
    after major wars and the creation of the welfare state)

-   Wars were not long enough to override class based interests, states
    developed with fractured elites, which never felt the need to be
    protected/demanded by the state
