# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: When Things Fall Apart: State Failure in Late-Century Africa
author(s): Robert #Bates
year: #y2008
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #STATE 
keywords: #comparative_case 

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary



Robert H. Bates: When Things Fall Apart: State Failure in Late-Century
Africa (2008):

PP 3-6: Chapter 1: Introduction

Why did political order give way to political conflict in late-century
Africa? Examples over 1970s & 1980s: Angola, Chad, Namibia, Nigeria,
Sudan, Equatorial Guinea, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Uganda. Bates turns to
theories of the state to find an answer. Bates anchors the book in Weber
(1958) and views coercion as the distinctive property of politics -- but
departs structuralism and turns to game theory.

Bates **argues** that political order cannot be treated as a given and
results when rulers (characterized as "specialists in violence") "employ
the means of coercion to protect the creation of wealth rather than to
prey upon it and when private citizens choose to set weapons aside and
to devote their time instead to the production of wealth and to the
enjoyment of leisure." When choices form an equilibrium, then political
order forms a state.

Are civil wars the outcome of insurgencies? Bates looks at the behavior
of government. The conditions for the breakdown of African order include
authoritarian nature of states and their rulers' predation. By making
people insecure, they provoked insurgencies.

PP 97-128: Chapter 6: Things Fall Apart

Exogenous shocked helped drive the value of key variables \[level of
public revenues and the elite's rate of discount\] into dangerous ranges
that threatened political order. Payoffs to the incumbent elites from
defection outpaced those from good governance. In the case of African
resource endowments, these variables had to change only a little to
trigger the effects. The changes in these variables party resulted from
the creation of authoritarian institutions and control regimes. Also
resulted from economic recession and post-Cold War political
realignment.

**The Decline of Public Revenues:** Late-century African government
faced a decline in public revenue from past policy choices, changes in
global economy and predatory political elites.

Examples: untaxed revenue on gold and coffee in Congo or smuggling in
Zaire and Burundi. Declining African exports to OECD nations after early
1980s recession (see figure 6.1 below). However, for oil producing
nations, revenues shot up because of price of oil, but when prices
dropped again, the governments found themselves with costly oil
ventures, so they borrowed heavily. Predation in Sierra Leone of
commodity and diamond markets by private enterprises and corrupt
President Siaka Stevens (see figure 6.2 below).


**The Impact of Declining Revenues:** Declining public revenues
naturally resulted in declining incomes of public employees, which
resulted in decline of public sector services and more corruption. "A
bureaucracy that had been created to facilitate the lives of the
citizens began instead to undermine their welfare."

The best at coercing were of course the military, and their income fell
as well; the soldiers then found ways to pay themselves (robbery,
protection rackets, pay for access, etc.).

Declining public revenues also made regional tension management more
difficult. For example: in Cote d'Ivoire, political order rested on
pacts between the elite in the south and the periphery areas in the
north.

Simply put: when revenue declines, likelihood of political disorder
increases. When public officials are underpaid, they become more
predatory. Fiscal problems also cause those dissatisfied with the
political order to withdraw (like those in periphery areas).

**Political Reform:** Declining public revenue also triggered popular
opposition to those in power which caused people to demand political
reform and institutional change. Reformers believed multiparty politics
and competitive elections could achieve these ends (accountability leads
to incentivizing policies that promote growth and prosperity). Reforms
were designed to secure political accountability and economic
prosperity, but they raised the level of insecurity for those in power
-- strengthening the incentive for defection and to engage in predation,
causing citizens to take up arms.

Reformation in Africa also caused cascades from one country to another,
causing reformers to take heart and double their efforts (see table 6.1
below).



The World Bank also became involved in Africa, emboldened by their
president Robert McNamara. The World Bank's "Berg Report" documented the
tendency of African governments to adopt policies that distorted markets
and undermined economic incentives, crippling growth. The World Bank
became more than a financier and became a government advisor to African
governments -- drawing upon two sources of policy strength: (1) economic
expertise, and (2) capital. The World Bank asked why African governments
adopt the policies undermining growth as illustrated in the Berg Report,
and the answer was that the governments lacked political accountability
-- making the World Bank champion political reform.

Furthermore the decline of the Soviet Union caused diplomats and
security specialists to no longer object to authoritarian ruler
displacement. The international environment changes impacted local
African political forces and caused authoritarian grasps to be less
secure. Incumbents feared for their political futures. Some countries
responded to multiparty reforms by trying to stay in power legitimately,
but many resorted to militarism (see figure 6.3 below).


**Natural Resources:** With the loss of public revenues, governments
became more predatory -- because of rich resource endowments, African
governments were tempted to abandon their role as a guardian and embrace
the role of predator, using their state power to extract wealth. If
seizing certain natural resources (petroleum, gemstones, and precious
metals) required military force, then so be it -- the short-term costs
would outweigh long-term costs, especially when political futures were
uncertain.

**Reverberations:** "Public revenues declined, political elites became
insecure and the temptation to engage in predation therefore rose in
Africa, amidst abundant opportunities to do so." Citizens sought patron
to safeguard life and property. Widespread costs and disorder were
attractive to those willing to invest in political organizations, and
one strategy stood out: championing land claims.

**Conclusion:** Exogenous shocks and forces set in motion previous
decisions that led to the erosion of fiscal foundations, which led to
declining public service and calls for political reform.

PP 129-139: Conclusion:

Political order is not a given, it is created by decisions. "There is
political order when citizens choose to turn away from military activity
and devote their energies to productive labor and when those who govern
choose to employ their power to protect rather than to prey upon the
wealth of that their citizens create." When the choices persist as an
equilibrium, a state is created. Foundations of the state lie in the
conditions that support equilibrium.

**Changing Perspectives:** This book was a change of perspective --
instead of focusing on insurgents, there was a focus on incumbents. Why
would governments adopt impoverishing policies? Why would they over
extract and alter the distribution of income to the point of political
instability? The crisis in political order was traced to public revenues
crises.

Political science on Africa focuses on ethnicity and ethnic conflicts --
Bates argues that ethnic tensions do in fact relate to political
conflict in Africa, but they do so at times of state failure. Similarly,
the resource curse does not hold -- the states whose economies have been
richly endowed are no more likely to fail than others -- resource wealth
and political conflict co-vary. Finally, democratization itself did not
cause the conflicts, but the authoritarian regimes did lay the political
and policy foundations for instability.
