# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Cadre Parties and Mass Parties
author(s): Maurice #Duverger
year: #y1976
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Party_Politics 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary




Maurice Duverger\'s \"Caucus and Branch, Cadre Parties and Mass
Parties\"

*Executive Summary: This chapter introduces two dichotomies with which
to describe parties: Cadre vs. Mass Parties and Caucus vs. Branch
organizations. Duverger makes an institutional/functionalist argument
(?) that labor/socialist parties ended up with different party
structures than conservative parties because socialists needed tight
organization to manage mass voters if they hoped to spread a message and
fund their movement as well as conservative parties did.*

**Caucus**

\- limited, closed organizations which wields great power because of its
influential members, small in number, seeking no expansion; membership
achieved by formal nomination or tacit co-option. Archaic type of
political party structure.

Two types of caucuses in late 19th century Europe:

**Conservative parties-** aristocrats, industrial magnates, bankers,
influential churchmen

**Liberal/Radical parties** - tradespeople and lesser industrialists,
civil servants, teachers, lawyers, journalists, and writers

**Branch**

\- centralized unit, part of a whole.

\- Parties founded on branches are more centralized than those founded
on caucuses.

\- Extensive, tries to enroll members, increase total strength. Quantity
is most important goal.

\- Branch appeals to masses; tries to keep in touch with members.

\- More geographically concentrated than caucuses.

\- Permanent, while caucuses are semi-permanent.

\- Socialist invention.

**Party**

\- aims to politically educate working class, picking out elite that can
take over government and administration; members are the primary
substance of party.

\- relies on subscriptions paid by members; branch\'s primary duty is to
collect dues.

\- every electoral campaign has major expenses.

**Mass Party**

\- replaces capitalist financing (a few big private donors,
industrialists, bankers, merchants) with democratic financing (spreads
burden over largest possible number of members)

**Cadre Party**

\- groups influential members to prepare for elections, conduct
campaigns, contact candidates, and use prestige to secure them votes

\- groups experts to organize campaign and electors

\- groups financiers to organize donations

\- Cadre party can match influence of mass party by careful selection of
influential members, experts, and financiers

**Cadre Parties vs. Mass Parties**

\- Cadre parties sometimes admit ordinary members in imitation of mass
parties; few parties are purely cadre parties. But that does not make
them mass parties.

\- differ by social/political sub-structure, not size.

\- Mass parties came into existence due to replacement of limited
franchise by universal suffrage.

\- Introducing universal suffrage led to socialist/mass parties in most
countries, but not always at the same time or in the same way. France
created a middle-class socialist party; Germany made a Social Democratic
party with a million members and a huge budget.

\- To make pro-labor law, competing parties needed to publish their
views in papers which would accept those views, not capitalist-owned
newspapers; so, they started their own. The only parties capable of
financing new major, anti-capitalist papers were mass parties.

\- Cadre and mass parties tend to be politically Right and Left, as well
as demographically Middle-class and Worker\'s parties. Middle-class
rarely needed to seek organized support of Working class, so they tended
to prefer Cadre Parties; Working Class rarely found capitalist allies,
so they preferred Mass parties.

\- For these reasons, until fascism, attempts to create mass
Conservative parties have generally failed.

\- Cadre parties tend to be caucus parties; decentralized and weakly
knit.

\- Mass parties tend to be based on branches, more centralized and
firmly knit.
