# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Cleavage structures, party systems, and voter alignments : an introduction
author(s): Seymour M. #Lipset and Stein #Rokkan
year: #y1967
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s):  #Party_Politics #Cleavages 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

#### First Summary

Seymour Martin Lipset and Stein Rokkan: Clevage Structures, Party
Systems, and Voter Alignments: An Introduction (2009):

\[This article is dense, I apologize for the long summary. The most
important points are the dimensions of cleavage (see figures 9.1 & 9.2)
and the sequences that lead cleavages into the creation of political
parties (figures 9.3 & 9.4) -- Garrett\]

The focus of this piece is on "conflicts and their translation into
party systems." Parties as alliances in conflicts over policies and
value commitments within the larger body politic.

Parties serve as essential agencies of mobilization and as such have
helped to integrate local communities into the nation or the broader
federation. The American Federalists and Democratic-Republicans as the
first national organizations represented attempts to bring Americans out
of local communities and states to give them roles in the national
polity.

Party integration can be analyzed at 2 levels: (1) parties establish
networks of cross-local communication channels that helps strengthen
national identities, and (2) the competitiveness helps set the national
system of government about any particular set of office-holders.

A competitive party system protects the nation against the discontents
of its citizens: grievances and attacks are deflected from the overall
system and directed towards the current set of power-holders.

Parties "make explicit the conflicting interests, the latent strains and
contrasts in the existing social structure, and they force subjects and
citizens to ally themselves across structural cleavage lines and set up
priorities among their commitments to established or prospective roles
in the system."

Parties have 'expressive,' 'instrumental,' and 'representative'
functions.

Parties aspire to majority positions in governments and are coalitions
of groups with different views on issues, but united in their hostility
to the other parties -- conflicts and controversies can arise out of the
social structure of society, but only a few polarize politics of any
given system.

There is a 'hierarchy of cleavage bases' -- the system will be under
heavier strain when cleavage lines are moral in nature rather than
mundane/negotiable matters (wages, profits, etc.)

**Dimensions of Cleavage: A Possible Model**

The authors present the model/typology below, with the l-g line
representing a territorial dimension of the national cleavage structure
and the a-i line a functional dimension (that cuts across the l-g line.

l = strictly local oppositions, g = conflicts over the system as a
whole.

a = conflict of short-term or long-term allocations of resources or
benefits

i = ideological and moral conflicts and interpretations of history and
human destiny

Cleavages are rarely at the poles -- the task is to locate alliance
behind given parties at given times with the two-dimensional space. The
axes are not easily quantifiable -- they are more of a heuristic device.
Examples:

-   Britain's first party opposition: heads of independent landed
    families versus the government and administration of London (this
    would be on the l side of the axis). Conflict was over patronage and
    places, not general policies.

    -   This is a common form in early phases of nation-building: small,
        undifferentiated, easily controlled electoral clientele -- and
        the gains/losses tend to be personal or concrete instead of
        collective or general.

    -   Such territorial oppositions rarely survive extensions of
        suffrage -- but much depends on timing of nation building.

-   In the US cleavages were mainly cultural and religious. Conflict
    between the Federalists and Democratic-Republicans or the Whigs and
    the Democrats typically centered on conceptions of public morality
    that pitted different groups against each other.

-   In Norway, universal suffrage was extended early but party cleavages
    took a while to mobilize. The initial 'politics of cultural defense'
    survived extensions of suffrage in the egalitarian South and West,
    but lost to the class politics in the economically backward North.

    -   A similar phenomenon took place in Finland.

-   In the British, and South Norway cases the decisive criterion of
    alignment is commitment to the locality and its dominant culture:
    you vote with your community and its leaders regardless of your
    economic position. In Norway's north, the criterion is commitment to
    a class and its collective interests: you vote with others in the
    same position as yourself whatever their localities, and you are
    willing to do so even if this brings you into opposition with
    members of your community.

**The Two Revolutions: The National and the Industrial**

Territorial oppositions set limits to nation-building -- functional
oppositions can only develop after consolidation of the national
territory. There emerges the spread of social mobilization. Early growth
of bureaucracy created territorial oppositions, but widening scope of
government activity and inter-local interactions created a complex
system of alignments sometimes between localities, and sometimes across
or within localities.

Early social mobilization often threatened territorial unity of a
nation, federation, or empire (see breakup of Habsburg territories, or
mobilization of Irish Catholics).

The authors propose another model distinguishing "four critical lines of
cleavage." This model can be transposed onto the previous model --
specially the a-i and l-g lines.

Two are the result of the "National" revolution: the conflict between
the central nation-building culture and the increasing resistance of the
ethnically, linguistically, or religiously distinct subject populations
in the provinces and the peripheries (1 in figure, see below): the
conflict between the centralizing standardizing, and mobilizing
nation-state and the historically established privileges of the church
(2).

Two of them are products of the "Industrial" revolution: the conflict
between landed interests and the rising class of industrial
entrepreneurs (3): the conflict between owners and employers on the one
side and tenants, laborers, and workers on the other (4).


The decisive battle in British and French history was between the
aspirations of the mobilizing nation-state and the corporate claims of
the churches.

The symmetry in 9.2 is only average tendencies, and does not exclude
wide variations on the a-i axis. Conflicts over the civic integration of
recalcitrant regional cultures (1) or religious organizations (2) need
not always lead to vertical networks (Dutch word *Verzuiling*).

Similar variations will occur at a wide range of points on the
territorial axis of our schema.

The National revolution forced ever-widening circles of the territorial
population to chose sides in conflicts over values and cultural
identities. The Industrial revolution also triggered a variety of
cultural counter-movements, but in the longer run tended to cut across
the value communities within the nation and to force the enfranchised
citizenry to choose sides in terms of their economic interests -- in the
a-g-i-l paradigm there are two types of these interest cleavages:
between rural and urban (3) and between worker and employer (4).

Example: Liberal v Conservative clashes in England after 1880s -- the
landed elite that ruled the country and the rising class of industrial
entrepreneurs (many at odds with the established church) aligned
themselves in opposition to defend their economic interests and to
assert their claims to status. The conflict between Conservatives and
Liberals reflected an opposition between two value orientations: the
recognition of status through ascription and kin connections versus the
claims for status through achievement and enterprise.

Example: east Elbian agricultural interests and western business
bourgeoisie in Germany pre-WWI -- the bulk of Liberals sided with the
Conservatives and did not try to rally the working class electorate on
their side the way the British party did. The result was a deepening of
chasm between burghers and workers, and attempts to bridge the chasm
through appeals to national and military values.

Example of alternative development: In France, Italy and Spain,
rural-urban cleavages rarely found direct expression in the development
of party oppositions. Other cleavages, particularly between the state
and the churches and between owners and tenants, had greater impact on
the alignment of electorates.

Examples: In the five Nordic countries the cities traditionally
dominated national political life, and the struggle for democracy and
parliamentary rule was triggered through broad mobilizations in the
peasantry -- an expression of protest against the central elite
officials and patricians (the l-g axis).

Conflict emerges between landed and urban interests centered around
commodity markets. Distinctly agrarian parties have only emerged where
strong cultural oppositions have deepened and embittered the strictly
economic conflicts.

Conflicts in the labor market are much more uniformly decisive. A
crucial factor in working-class movements is the openness of the given
society.

Since WW2 there has generally been a softening of ideological tensions:
a movement from the iðŸ¡ªa in the model. This is due to rising living
standards, national cooperation, and growth of middle class. Greatest
factor was possibly: the entrenchment of the working-class parties in
local and national governmental structures and their consequent
'domestication' within the established system.

**Transformation of Cleavage Structures into Party Systems**

[Conditions for Channeling of Opposition]{.underline}:

Cleavages do not translate into party oppositions on their own -- there
are organizational considerations and electoral strategies at play. So
what are the conditions for the expression of protest and representation
of interests in society?

1.  We must know the traditions of decision-making in the polity:
    conciliar v autocratic procedures, rules for handling
    grievances/protests, measures taken to control/protect political
    associations, freedom of communication, and organization of
    demonstrations.

2.  We must know the channels for the expression and mobilization of
    protest: Are there representatives and how accessible are they? How
    was a conflict expressed?

3.  We need information about the opportunities, pay-offs, and costs of
    alliances in the system: how ready or reluctant were old movements
    to broaden bases of support.

4.  We must know the possibilities, the implications, and the
    limitations of majority rule in the system: what alliances would be
    most likely to bring about majority control of the organs of
    representation and how much influence could majorities exert in
    structuring institutions and allocating resources?

[The Four Thresholds]{.underline}

This series of questions is a sequence of thresholds in the path of any
movement pressing forward new sets of demands in a political system:

1.  Legitimation: "Are all protests rejected as conspiratorial, or is
    there some recognition of the right of petition, criticism, and
    opposition?"

2.  Incorporation: "Are all or most of the supporters of the movement
    denied status as participants in the choice of representatives or
    are they given political citizenship rights on a part with
    opponents?"

3.  Representation: "Must the new movement join larger and older
    movements to ensure access to representative organs or can it gain
    representation on its own?"

4.  Majority power: "Are there build-in checks and counterforces against
    numerical majority rule in the system or will a victory at the polls
    give a party or an alliance power to bring about major structural
    changes in the national system?"

Early comparative works focus on lowering the first two thresholds: the
emergence of parliamentary opposition and a free press and the extension
of franchise (Tocqueville and Ostrogorski, Weber and Michels)

Later work shifted to 3^rd^ and 4^th^ thresholds: the consequences of
the electoral system and the structure of the decision-making arena for
the formation and the functioning of party systems.

Instead of a focus on country-by-country comparisons of conditions and
strategies, the authors shift to arrive of 2 distinct sequences of
change: the rise of lower-class movements and parties and the decline of
*regime censitaire* \[regime of suffrage based on tax thresholds\]
parties.

[The Rules of the Electoral Game]{.underline}:

Early electoral systems set a high threshold for rising parties -- it
was difficult for working-class movements to gain representation on
their own. Electoral injustices added to further alientation of working
classes from national institutions and created a 'centrifugal
pluralism': one major movement outside the established political arena
and several opposed parties within it.

The costs of pay-offs of mergers, alliances, and coalitions are a
crucial point in the translation of cleavage structure into party
systems. The height of the representation threshold and the rules of
central decision-making may increase or decrease the net returns of
joint action, but the intensity of inherited hostilities and the
openness of communications across the cleavage lines will decide whether
mergers or alliances are actually workable. See transitions to
proportional representation systems.

**A Model of the Generation of the European Party System**

[Four Decisive Dimensions of Opposition]{.underline}:

The review of the conditions for the translation of socio-cultural
cleavages into political oppositions suggests three conclusions:

1.  The constitutive contrasts in the national system of party
    constellations generally tended to manifest themselves before any
    lowering of the threshold of representation.

2.  The high thresholds of representation during the phase of mass
    politicization set severe tests for the rising political
    organizations

3.  The decisive moves to lower the threshold of representation
    reflected divisions among the established *regime censitaire*
    parties rather than pressures from the new mass movements

**Summary:** See figure 9.2 above again for the 4 decisive dimensions: 2
created by national revolutions, 2 by industrial revolutions. Decisive
contrasts among Western party systems reflect differences in the
national histories of conflict and compromise across the first 3 of the
4 cleavages distinguished in the analytical schema: the
center-periphery, the State-Church, and the land-industry cleavages
generated national developments in divergent directions, while the
owner-worker cleavage tended to bring the party systems closer to each
other in their basic structure.

[A Model in Three Steps]{.underline}:

Authors developed a "model of alternative alliances and oppositions" to
reduce the variety of empirical party systems to a set of ordered
consequences of decisions and developments at three crucial junctures in
the history of each nation:

1.  During the Reformation -- the struggle for control of the
    ecclesiastical organizations within the national territory

2.  In the wake of the democratic revolution after 1789 -- the conflict
    over the control of the vast machineries of mass education to be
    built up by the mobilizing nation-states

3.  During the early phases of the industrial revolution -- the
    opposition between landed interests and the claims of the rising
    commercial and industrial leadership in cities and towns.

8 types of alliance-opposition structures = combinational products of
three successive dichotomies (see figure 9.3 below from p 124).

[The Fourth Step: Variations in the Strength and Structure of the
Working-Class Movements]{.underline}:

The 3-step model stops short of a point before the decisive thrust
towards universal suffrage -- it pinpoints the systems of division
within the 'independent' strata of the European national electorates,
among the owners of property and the holders of professional or
education privileges qualifying them for the vote during the regime
censitaire. This is only half the story -- the extension of universal
suffrage changed the character of each national political system,
generated new cleavages, and brought about the restructuring of the old
alignments.

All of the European polities developed some sort of working-class
movement at some point between the first extensions of the suffrage and
the various 'post-democratic' attempts at the repression of partisan
pluralism.

Figure 9.4 on p 130 adds on the fourth decisive area of cleavage in
Western polities -- 3 crucial junctures in national history
corresponding to the first 3 dimensions.

**Implications for Comparative Political Sociology:**

The party systems of the 1960s reflect (with a few exceptions) the
cleavage structures of the 1920s. This is a crucial characteristic of
Western competitive politics in the age of 'high mass consumption': the
party alternatives, and in remarkably many cases the party
organizations, are older than the majorities of the national
electorates. There is currently long continuity in Western active
parties -- which is taken as a matter of course.

The authors look specifically at a few European cases on pp 135-137:
France, Germany, Italy, and Spain.


#### Second Summary

Cleavage Structure, Party Systems and Voter Alignments: An Introduction
(1967)

Seymour M Lipset (1922-2006)

Stein Rokkan (1921-1979)

**Thank you to whoever previously annotated this scan. You da tru MVP.**

**RIP Kobe (1978-2020)**

Chapter in a nutshell: This chapter offers three things: 1) a typology
of cleavage bases within a national political community; 2) the
development of party systems; 3) discussion of the differences between
party systems, specifically voter alignments based on sociocultural
criteria such as region, class, religion, among others. Methodology:
Comparison of 12 countries, 10 western plus Japan and Brazil, all of
which have competitive party systems.

Initial formulations (1)

-   Three themes, questions regarding those themes

    -   The genesis of the system of contrasts and cleavages

    -   The conditions for the development of stable cleavages and
        oppositions

    -   Behavior of the public/citizens in the party system resulting
        from cleavages

-   Developmental comparison: Understanding the history of these parties
    (they didn't spring to life in a vacuum)

    -   See the bottom of page 2 for a detailed explanation of this
        (which includes development of competitive politics,
        institutionalization of mass elections, cleavages which gave
        rise to parties)

-   The political party: Agent of conflict and instrument of integration

    -   Parties as conflict, division, opposition within a body politic

    -   Parties **also** as essential agents of mobilization,
        integrating local communities into the broader federation,
        awakening a sense of national community

        -   Think Federalists and Democratic-Republicans getting people
            to think about more than just their state's politics

    -   Integration at two levels, creating support for the party
        through cross-local communication but also creating support for
        the national system of government above any set of office
        holders

    -   Parties as regular channels of expressing conflicting interest,
        which has stabilized a great number of nation-states (kind of
        oxymoronic, right?)

        -   Conflict-integration dialectic, with a **focus on how
            conflicts create party systems**

    -   Functions of parties (expressive, instrumental, representative)
        on page 5

        -   Parties aren't mere conflict but must cut across cleavages
            to establish common fronts with potential enemies and
            opponents (if they want to decisive influence/power)

Dimensions of cleavage and alliances (9)

-   This is a lot of paradigm/model building (and historical examples in
    Europe), which I won't get into the specifics of since you can still
    follow the argument without much of it

    -   Two dimensions of cleavage: territorial-cultural and functional

        -   Cleavages exist somewhere on two intersecting axes,
            territorial and functional

        -   Territorial-cultural, local opposition to dominate national
            elites

            -   Think Quebec v. English dominated Canada

        -   Functional, similarly oriented subjects across localities

-   Comes after nation building, assuming territorial cleavages didn't
    tear the country apart

-   Two revolutions: National and industrial

    -   National: central nation-building culture v. the increasing
        resistant ethnic, linguistic, religious subpopulations in the
        periphery **(cleavage)**

        -   Also, nation state v. church **(cleavage)**

    -   Industrial: Landed interests v. rising class of entrepreneurs
        **(cleavage)**

        -   Also, owners/employers v. laborers/workers **(cleavage)**

    -   National revolution forced ever widening circles of the
        territorial population to choose sides in conflicts over values
        and cultural identities

    -   The industrial revolution also triggered cultural
        countermovements but it the long run tended to cut across the
        value communities within the nation and forced the enfranchised
        citizens to choose sides in terms of their **economic
        interests** (this is key!)

The transformation of of cleavage structures into party systems (26)

-   Conditions for the channeling of opposition

    -   Conditions for the expression of protest and the representation
        of interests

        -   First, we must know the traditions of decision making in the
            polity

            -   Conciliar v autocratic, freedom of communication,
                protection of political associations

        -   Second, we must know about the channels for the expression
            and mobilization of protest

            -   System of represented? How were they chosen? Conflict a
                direct demonstration? Strike?

        -   Third, we need information about the opportunities, the
            payoffs, and the costs of alliances in the system

            -   How ready or reluctant were the old movements to broaden
                their bases? How easy was it for them to gain new
                political support?

        -   Fourth, we must know about the possibilities, the
            implications, and the limitations of majority rule in the
            system

            -   What alliances would be most likely to bring about
                majority control?

-   Four Thresholds

    -   Path of any movement pressing forward with a new sets of demands
        within a political system

        -   Legitimation

        -   Incorporation

        -   Representation

        -   Majority Power

    -   See p. 28-29 for a typology of party systems

-   The translation of cleavage structure into party systems: the costs
    and payoffs of mergers, alliances, and coalitions

    -   The intensity of inherited hostilities and the openness of
        communications across the cleavage lines will decide whether
        mergers or alliances are workable

    -   "Freezing hypothesis": Once these parties are created, they
        freeze/stay that way, don't observe too much changes after (due
        to institualization of cleavages into parties, aka its hard to
        change institutions)

A model for the generation of the European party system (33)

-   Three conclusions from the four dimensions of opposition

    -   First, the contrasts in the national system of party
        constellations generally tend to manifest themselves before any
        lowering of the threshold of representation

    -   Second, the high threshold of representation during the phase of
        mass politicization set severe tests for the rising political
        organizations. The surviving formations tended to be firmly
        entrenched in the inherited social structures and could not
        easily be dislodged through changes in the rules of the
        electoral game.

    -   Third, the moves to lower the threshold of representation
        reflected divisions among the established parties rather than
        pressure from new mass movements

-   The decisive contrasts among the Western party systems reflect
    differences in the national histories of conflict and compromise
    across the first three of four cleavage lines: center-periphery,
    state-church, land-industry (throwback to two revolutions discussion
    earlier)

-   More modeling unfortunately plus case studies but here's a handy
    table

Implications for comparative political sociology

-   Eh, not really important since we're not sociologists nor was this
    annotated nor do I have time to read it
