
# Metadata
## Identifiers
title:  Tropical Underdevelopment
author(s): Jeffry #Sachs
year: #y2001 
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Development #Geography
keywords: 

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

Jeffrey Sachs: Tropical Underdevelopment (2001):

Question: Why is there a relationship between ecological zones and per
capita income? Economies in tropical zones = poor, economies in
temperate zones = generally rich. When temperate zones aren't rich it is
typically due to decades of communism or extreme isolation.

Cross-country analyses of economic growth neglect the importance of
geography and topography. Sachs uses geographic information system (GIS)
\[mapping & geospatial analysis software\] to show that tropic
production technology lagged behind temperate zone technology in two
critical areas: agriculture and health. Lagged development created
geographic income gap. Mobilizing energy sources in tropical areas also
contributes to gap. Geographical problems are amplified geopolitical
problems. Sachs suggests development of health and agricultural tech
targeted at tropical economic needs.

Only 2 countries in tropic zones = rich economies; Hong Kong &
Singapore. Landlocked regions tend to be worse off; so tropic &
landlocked (Bolivia, Chad, Niger, Burkina Faso, etc.) = very poor. Even
sub-tropical areas seem to be worse off than temperate neighbors, even
when part of the same country (US north v South; China north v south).
See figure 1 below.

**Five hypotheses:**

1.  "Technologies in critical areas -- especially health & agriculture,
    but also construction, energy & mfg. -- are ecologically specific.
    Technologies do not diffuse across ecological zones."

2.  "By the start of the era of modern economic growth...temperate-zone
    technologies were more productive than tropical-zone technologies in
    crucial areas of health, agriculture, and energy utilization, not to
    mention military technology. The differences are deeply embedded in
    ecological characteristics, and not easily overcome through
    tinkering."

3.  "Technological innovation is an
    increasing-returns-to-scale-activity...one that is limited by the
    extent of the market. Temperature-zone innovation has been strongly
    favored by a larger and richer population, which at least since 1800
    has been integrated in a global market for innovation. The
    increasing-returns-to-scale property of tech. innovation is probably
    the main amplifier of the income gap."

4.  "Societal dynamics -- especially the process of urbanization and
    demographic transition -- are two further amplifiers of the
    development process, by which technologically laggard tropical
    regions have experience a widening shortfall vis-Ã -vis the
    fast-growing temperate-zone regions."

5.  "Geopolitical factors -- such as temperate-zone imperial domination
    of tropical regions on the basis of superior military tech., and
    rich-country control of the institutions of globalization -- are
    further amplifiers, but their role is often exaggerated when not
    considered alongside the underlying technological, demographic, and
    urbanization processes."

Policy solutions for tropical underdevelopment will require much greater
focus on tech. innovation directed at tropical ecology. Since social
institutions that underline tech. innovation are both market and
non-market based, the institutional underpinnings will have to extend
beyond market liberalization and privatization.

**I. Some Definitions and Measurements of Tropical Underdevelopment:**

Tropics are understood in 2 ways: geographic and ecological.

-   Geographical tropics = areas of the Earth where the sun passes
    directly overhead at some point during the year. Area between 23.5
    degrees North (Tropic of Cancer) and 23.5 degrees South (Tropic of
    Capricorn). There is a systematic gradation of average per capita
    income with high latitudes in North and South. See figure 2 below.

    -   Not necessarily because of institutional linkages to Europe:
        "When latitude is tested for explanatory power against various
        direct climate or ecological measures, we find that latitude per
        se adds little if anything to the explanation patterns of
        cross-country development.

-   Ecological tropics = high year-round temperatures and the absence of
    winter frost. Temperature is combined with precipitation measures to
    create sub-categories: humid tropics, wet-dry tropics, and arid
    tropics. This is a rough designation because other ecological
    measures are important too (mineral deposits, proximity to markets,
    seismic/volcanic activity, parasite/disease vectors, etc.)

    -   Koeppen-Geiger (KG) climate classification system is used. See
        figure 3 below.


GIS makes it possible to integrate climatic and economic data. The
authors use 1995 GNP data per capita and calculate it for the different
climatic regions. See table 1 below. Near = 100 km of sea navigability,
far = 100 km away from sea navigability.

What is evident is the dominance of Cf-near regions (8% of world's land,
22% of population, and 52% of GNP). See figure 4 below.

A low level of per capita income in 1995 signifies slow average economic
growth during past 2 centuries. The authors use Maddison's (1995) data
\[aggregate GDP and population for major regions, 1820-1992\] to
estimate average growth rates of tropic and temperate regions during
period of modern economic growth. Long-term growth patterns can be seen
in table 2 below.


To examine the effect of climate zone on recent growth, the author uses
Barro's (1991) cross-country growth framework, in with annual growth
rate in GDP per capita over a time interval is regressed on ignition
1n(GDP per capita), initial years of schooling, and various economic
policy and institutional variables. The authors add in the variable
measuring the share of the country's population living in temperate
climate zones. It is the following equation:

Estimating 1965-1990 using the Summers-Heston (1991) data set, they
find that a temperate zone economy, all other things equal, would grow
at around 1.6% per year more rapidly than a comparable non-temperate
zone country]{.underline}.

Will Masters and Margaret McMillan (2000) have similar findings:
countries without winter frost experience approximately 1 percent
slower growth during 1960-19990 than did countries with winter frost,
controlling for initial income and population, trade openness,
schooling, investment rates, institutional quality, and other
variables]{.underline}.

Climate and ecology variables are highly significant explanatory
variables for the level of GDP per capita, and they perform better than
simple geographic variable such as distance from the equator.

**II. Explaining Tropical Underdevelopment**

Author believes that although colonialism plays a big role in
underdevelopment, the roots of tropical underdevelopment are deeper.
Weber argues that modern economic growth is tied to capitalism, but the
authors points out Asian development, and development between regions
within the same country also follow the tropical/temperate divide.

Sachs **argues** that "the technology for production in the tropics has
long lagged behind temperate-zone technology in two critical areas --
food production and health -- opening a substantial gap in incomes
between the two regions. A third gap is the ability to mobilize energy
resources."

[Food Production in Temperate and Tropical Zones]{.underline}:

-   Major staple crops (rice, maize and wheat) has higher productivity
    in temperate zones \[temperate = food exporters, tropical = food
    importers\]. Grain yields per hectare is much higher in temperate
    regions.

-   Sachs finds that productivity per hectare in temperate climate zones
    was 51% higher than in non-temperate zones on average. See page 12
    for the formula.

-   Several possible factors: soil formation and erosion, pests and
    parasites, effects of ambient temperature on plant respiration on
    net photosynthesis, and water availability in conditions of high
    evapo-transpiration.

    -   A. Soil Formation and Erosion: Tropical soil is fragile -- heavy
        precipitation and high temperatures damage the soil, and lose
        fertility quickly. Temperate zones have a better buildup of
        deeper/richer top-soils over time.

    -   B. Pests and Parasites: Tropics have high biodiversity and this
        includes crop pests and parasites that can devastate monoculture
        agriculture.

    -   C. Plant respiration and net photosynthesis: plant respiration
        depends on ambient temperature, and warm climates have a higher
        rates of respiration (including during the night) which impacts
        net photosynthesis.

    -   E. Water availability and water control: surface water
        evaporates quickly and transpiration of water through plant
        surfaces is also high (due to high ambient temperatures) -- so
        even with high precipitation, water scarcity for agriculture can
        be a problem.

[Health in Temperate and Tropical Climate Zones]{.underline}:

-   Burden of disease is higher in tropics, impacting life expectancy
    and infant mortality. The authors uses regressions (formulas on page
    15):

    -   Infant mortality is 52% lower in temperate zones when
        controlling for income.

    -   Life expectancy is 8% higher in temperate zones when controlling
        for income.

-   Worse health outcomes impacts labor productivity through lost
    workdays and reduced physical & cognitive capacities.

-   Health outcomes can also be impacted by social, historical and
    genetic factors in addition to ecological and economic. For example,
    status of women, societal beliefs about health, or previous exposure
    to a disease.

-   Poor nutrition also affects health.

-   See page 17 for a more detailed case study of disease ecology. In
    short, in temperate zones, some diseases can have summer peaks of
    incidence, but also winter troughs -- where tropics can suffer from
    year-round transmission. For example mosquitos or ticks.

[Energy Resources in Temperate and Tropical Climate Zones]{.underline}:

-   Early industrialization of temperate climate regions was aided by
    proximity to coal.

-   For oil and gas, global production in 1995 was 210 quadrillion BTUs.

    -   Of this 37 (17.5%) was in tropical ecozone, where (82.5%) was in
        non-tropical.

    -   Share of global population was 43% in tropics and 57% in
        non-tropics.

    -   Therefore, per capita hydrocarbon production in tropical
        countries was only 28 percent of the per capita hydrocarbon
        production in the non-tropical countries.

**III. Forces of Amplification of Tropical Underdevelopment:**

In 1820, per capita income of tropical regions was about 70% of the
income of temperate zones. By 1992, as a result of slower growth,
tropical regions slipped to around 25% of the GDP per capita of
temperate regions.

Three factors important to process of amplification: (1) differential
technological advance, (2) differential demographic trends, and (3)
superior economic and military power of temperate-zone countries
(especially through colonialism) but also control of post-colonial
institutions.

[Technological Change in Temperate and Tropical Climate
Zones]{.underline}

-   The "rich get richer" story is too simple because technological
    innovation tends to diffuse to laggard regions as well. Poor
    countries should grow more rapidly, not less, than rich countries
    because they are catching up -- but this doesn't apply to tropics.

    -   See page 21 for formulas of technology diffusion.

-   Sachs **hypothesizes** that the tropical climate did not receive the
    proper rate of innovation diffusion because certain key technologies
    could not cross the ecological divide.

    -   E.g., new technologies in energy utilization, construction,
        environmental management, and new materials.

-   Table 3 below shows one measure of differences in innovation.

[Demographic Transition and Tropical Underdevelopment]{.underline}:

-   Poor food productivity and poor health have slowed the demographic
    transitions = change from high-fertility, high-mortality society to
    low-fertility, low-mortality society.

-   Advantage from the transition is that investments per child will be
    higher in low-fertility environments.

-   Transition results in slower population growth.

-   Poor food productivity slows transition by slowing shift from rural
    to urban society.

-   See page 24 for a fertility regression formula: on average a
    temperate-zone economy has a total fertility rate that is 52% of the
    rate for a non-temperate economy, when controlled for income.

[Temperate-zone Power and Tropical Underdevelopment]{.underline}:

-   Colonial domination frustrated long-term economic growth of the
    colonized regions for several reasons: (1) relative neglect of key
    public goods (especially education & health of indigenous
    populations), (2) suppression of higher education among the
    colonized population, (3) creation of oppressive political
    mechanisms (forced labor and head taxes), and (4) active suppression
    of local industry in favor of cash crops and extractive industries.

-   Furthermore, strong modern economies have control of institutions
    like the IMF

**Tropical Success Stories:**

The biggest tropical success have been Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan,
Malaysia, and Mauritius (and also Thailand and Indonesia until 1997-98).
All are characterized by 2 main features: (1) all achieved notable
successes in improving public health in the lead-up to their economic
takeoffs, and 92) these economies took policies to diversify away from
primary commodities, and especially tropical agriculture, in favor of
export-oriented manufacturing activities -- they were able to establish
productive sectors (e.g., textiles, electronic machinery,
semiconductors, etc.) where they weren't burdened by climatic or
ecological factors.

The problem is that many tropical countries, and especially Sub-Saharan
Africa, could not replicate these successes without extreme external
assistance.