# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Approaches to the State Alternative Conceptions and Historical Dynamics 
author(s): Stephen D. #Krasner
year: #y1984
citation: 
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #STATE 
keywords: #conceptualization 

## Body

from: 
cohort:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary




**Approaches to the State Alternative Conceptions and Historical
Dynamics - Stephen D. Krasner** (this paper is a review of the book
where several scholars write separate essays about state)

The purpose of this essay is to examine the ways in which several recent
books explicitly concerned with \"the state\" differ from and challenge
prevailing intellectual approaches that emerged out of the behavioral
revolution of the 1950s.

Main issue from recent literature concerning the state are:

The extent of state autonomy - Can the state formulate and implement its
preferences?

The degree of congruity between the state and its environment - How do
institutional structures change in response to alterations in domestic
and international environments and then in subsequent time periods
influence these environments?

**How the state should be defined** (according to Roger Benjamin and
Raymond Duval)

1\. As government -- collective set of personnel who occupy positions of
decisional authority (won't be considered in this essay)

2\. As \"public bureaucracy or administrative apparatus as a coherent
**[totality]{.underline}** (not divisible to small pieces)\" and as an
institutionalized legal order. This conceptualization is most popular in
recent literature.

3\. As ruling class.

4\. As normative order.

Five characteristics of the recent statist literature (in comparison to
behavioral approach):

1.  See politics more as a problem of rule and control (preserving
    order) than the distribution of power between political actors.

2.  Can be treated as an actor in its own right - state cannot be
    understood as a reflection of societal characteristics or
    preferences.

3.  Places greater emphasis on institutional constraints, both formal
    and informal, on individual behavior. Actors are bound within these
    structures, which limit, even determine, their conceptions of their
    own interest and their political resources.

4.  Focused on historical process. Current institutional structures may
    be a product of some peculiar historical conjuncture. Moreover,
    historical choices constrain future choices (path dependence).

5.  More inclined to see disjunctures and stress within any given
    political system. Political life is fraught with tensions and
    conflicts. Political life is characterized, by strife and
    uncertainty about the rules of the game within which allocative
    process is carried out.

Those 5 principles do not constitute a coherent theory of the state. The
studies in this book pose challenge to behavioral analytical tradition.

**A Contrast with Pluralist Theories of Leadership**

Pluralist approach []{dir="rtl"}emphasizes problems of
[allocation]{.underline} rather than ones of rule and control. Political
sphere can be portrayed as competition of groups that what to maximize
their utility while rules of the game constrain their behavior. In the
purest version of pluralist argument, the government is seen as a cash
register that totals up and then averages the preferences and political
power of societal actors. The major function of public officials is to
make sure that the game is played fair.

However most of the pluralists are concerned with the [role of political
leaders]{.underline} and [public officials]{.underline}. In the "Who
Govern" Dahl shows how personal preferences (not influenced by any
interest group) of mayor of New Haven influenced public life and urban
renewal. Dahl views the state as a collection of individuals occupying
particular roles, not as an administrative apparatus or legal order
(state as government). The pluralist universe is atomistic. Different
societal groups and political leaders have different objectives and
political resources. Public policy is the outcome of the resolution of
vectors resulting from interests and resources. No attention to the
structure and institutions, norms, values and beliefs.

In contrast, statist approach maintains that [preferences and resources
of public officials are constrained by the administrative
apparatus]{.underline}, legal order, and enduring beliefs. One of the
critical purposes of the state is to represent symbolically the
existence and unity of the political community.

Another distinction between sophisticated pluralist and statist views is
that pluralism does not sharply differentiate public actors from their
own society. Statist perspectives [contrast individuals in and out of
public office]{.underline}. Political leaders are state actors pursuing
either particular state goals or collective societal objectives and
utilizing resources primarily derived from their official positions.

A third distinction is that pluralist theories of leadership see public
officials as relatively more constrained by societal pressures. Statist
orientations see [political leaders as less constrained by societal
forces]{.underline}. They can alter preferences of the society using the
state\'s own resources.

Popularity of pluralistic approach(Behaviorism) was a reaction against
formal legalism, the approach that had dominated the discipline of
political science in the United States from its inception during the
last part of the nineteenth century through 1940s. In this approach
state stood in a superior hierarchical position to other parts of the
polity. Formal rules were seen as independent variables. Behaviorist
approaches focused on the society and reversed the causal relationship
that had been posited by form legalism. Societal forces were viewed as
the independent variables

**Public Policy: The State as Exogenous Variable**

[Nordlinger\'s]{.underline} demonstrate that \"the preferences of the
stat are at least as important as those of civil society in accounting
for what the democratic state does and does not do.

The preferences of the state, which Nordlinger defines as \"all those
individuals who occupy offices that authorize them to make and apply
decisions, may be generated within the state itself

[Type III]{.underline} state autonomy refer to situations in which there
is non-divergence between the preferences of the state and the society.
The state may initiate policy and provide access for particular societal
groups. It can reinforce a weak level of convergence by manipulating
information, inflating the success of ongoing programs, setting agendas,
appealing to widely shared symbols, playing upon deference to official
expertise, and deflecting potential opposition.

[Type II]{.underline} state autonomy refers to situations in which state
action changes divergent societal preference to convergent ones through
following: altering the views of societal opponents; limiting the
deployment of resources by societal opponents; gaining the support of
indifferent actors; and increasing the resources of societal actors
holding convergent views

[Type I]{.underline} state autonomy refers to situations in which state
actors translate their preferences into authoritative action despite
divergent societal preferences

However, Nordlinger does not discuss what can constrain officials. His
political universe is not qualitatively different from earlier pluralist
positions (still consists of atomistic political actors). Nordlinger
argues that the ability of state officials to carry out their
preferences is not a function of the institutional but rather of the
amount of societal resistance that they encounter (which is similar to
pluralistic view).

[Clifford Geertz]{.underline} "Negara: The Theater State in Nineteenth
Century Bali". Geertz shows that the essence of the state in
nineteenth-century Bali was not allocation but ceremony. Mass ritual was
not a device to shore up the state, but rather the state. The overriding
objective of each noble house in Balinese society was to control more
men and resources in order to stage more elaborate ceremonies to
demonstrate a higher position in the social order, which was seen as a
reflection or mirror of a more encompassing hierarchical cosmos that
linked man and the gods.

Bali exposes the symbolic dimensions of state power. Geertz conceives of
the state as a normative order. Symbols embodied in the state and
representing basic political and ethical sentiments that permeate the
polity can be seen as a fundamental institutional constrain that
channels the behavior of individuals even to the point of endangering or
sacrificing their lives. Political activity focused on the state
sustains the ethical and moral needs of citizens, not just their
material ones.

**Political Development: The State as an Intervening Variable**

Authors discussed in this section reject functional explanations of
state development. Institutional structures do not respond in any rapid
and fluid way to alterations in the domestic or international
environment. Change is difficult and slow. Incongruence between societal
demands and the state is the norm. Institutional change is episodic and
dramatic (result of crisis).During periods of crisis politics becomes a
struggle over the basic rules of the game r than allocation within a
given set of the rules. However, once crises are past institutional
arrangements tend to rigidity. Institutions reproduce themselves and re
more to their own needs than to those of their domestic society or the
intern environment.

Two patter incongruence between the state and its environment:

**Pattern I: Public Stasis and Private Dynamism**

The state as administrative apparatus and legal order will not smoothly
adjust to changes in its domestic environment (because of institutional
rigidity). Institutional statis is also encouraged by sunk costs (we
already invested in this set of institution and we don't know if other
set will work). Thus, even if there is widespread societal
dissatisfaction with a particular set of institutions, it may be
irrational to change them. In addition, it is hard to distinguish
between temporary societal change that pressure institution and enduring
one.

Skowronek suggests that there are four characteristics that describe any
state:

1.  the concentration of authority at the national center

2.  the penetration of institutional controls from the governmental
    center throughout the territory

3.  the centralization of authority within the national government \...

4.  the specialization of institutional tasks and roles within the
    government

He use the example of US which in the early 19 century was week in all
of those characteristics (except courts and parties)

In the period of its birth, the American state was congruent with its
environment. State structures were consistent with the functional needs
of society, the preferences of state officials, and basic political
beliefs. However, over time the society and economy changed. Such an
incongruence constantly placed strains on the weak and fragmented
political system.

[Skowronek]{.underline} examines the way in which institutional
structures changed in three major issue areas: business regulation, the
military, and the civil service. Functionalist logic would predict the
creation of a strong state to meet new societal needs and demands. But
Skowronek demonstrate that this did not happened. The development of
stronger national capabilities was impeded not simply by the opposition
of specific groups but more fundamentally by the existing
institutional structures.

Public policy cannot be viewed simply as the resolution of a set of
vectors. The interests and political resources of actors are a function
of existing institutions, and this may make it impossible for any given
actor or coalition of actors, whether state or private, to implement
their preferences. Thus, the institutional structures of the past placed
constraints on the possibilities for the future. The preferences and
capabilities of political actors cannot be treated as exogenous
variable.

**Pattern II: State Demands and Societal Resistance**

Incongruity between the state and civil society can also arise because
the state increases its demands upon the society. This may cause social
unrest and challenge to legitimacy of the governmental actions.
Therefore, usually political leaders increase extractions from the
society when there is a threat of invasion. For instance, Tilly argued
that the need to maintain and increase military establishments was the
major impetus for the growth of the state\'s administrative apparatus.

[Gillis]{.underline} argues that nineteenth-century German reforms were
designed to increase the power of the state. Citizenship was defined as
a set of duties, not rights

[Pintner]{.underline} shows that the perennial Russian problem was that
the needs of the state, prompted by external threat, exceeded its
extractive capacity. Economic reform, including the emancipation of the
serfs, was initiated from above to increase the level of resources that
the state could secure from its society.

[Ellen Kay Trimberge]{.underline} examines four cases (Japan, Turkey,
Egypt, and Peru) of major social change initiated from above by military
bureaucrats.

**Punctuated Equilibrium**

A basic analytic distinction must be made between periods of
institutional creation and periods of institutional stasis. The kinds of
causal factors that explain why a set of state structures is created in
the first place may be quite distinct from those that explain its
persistence over time.

Sidney Verba talks about the branching tree model of sequential
development (which just path dependence) of institutions. Past choices
preclude certain strategies or make them very costly. Example of
branching tree model is Lipset and Rokkan\'s model of the development of
European party system. They argue that there were three crucial
historical junctures. At each of these critical junctures the
nation-building elite that controlled the state machinery had alliance
options. Once a particular alliance was chosen, however, it set the
agenda for future party development. Formative experiences initiated
certain trends or institutional patterns that took on a self-
perpetuating character and hence affected ideology, structure, and
political out- comes in later years.

Another example is Charles Sabel's argument about Fordism.

Fernand Braudel has argued that one of the critical determinants of the
rise of capitalism in the West was that for a set of fortuitous reasons
cities revived faster than states in the Middle Ages.

Hugh Heclo argued that institutional characteristics of states in more
industrially developed areas have set an agenda for states in less
developed areas because of a process of transnational learning.
Virtually every country today has, at least on paper, some kind of
social security system, even though the economic resources of many Third
World countries are totally incapable of actually implementing such a
program.

Even the state itself can be seen in this light.

Short bursts of rapid institutional change followed by long period of
stasis can be termed punctuated equilibrium (term that come from
alternative to Darwinism).
