# Metadata
## Identifiers
title:  Bringing the State back in: Strategies of Analysis in Current Research
author(s): Theda #Skocpol
year: #y1985 
citation: 
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #STATE #Europe 
keywords: #comparative_case 

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

Bringing the State back in: Strategies of Analysis in Current Research

By: Theda Skocpol

The pre 1975(1930-1975) comparative academic world was principally
interested in looking at 'society' rather than the state itself. Current
(1985) understanding of the role of the state is connecting contemporary
research to some of the earliest social scientists such as Weber. Weber
argues that the state is more than the government itself, but the
combined systems that impacting all the structures of societies. Those
systems are administrative, legal, bureaucratic, among other subgroups.

Connecting with early theory are the two question areas that 'state'
centric research is trying to answer.

1\. How should we understand state autonomy and the capacity of actors
to affect policy change?

2\. What is the impact of states on the content and working of politics?

AKA, how does the structures inherent in a state affect the policies it
uses and proposes? & How do those structures affect people, power, and
society?

**The autonomy and capacity of states**

The state as an actor is a difficult concept. The first level of
understanding is some definition of 'the state'. Skocpol doesn't give a
specific clean definition. Rather an implicit definition is cobbled
together through the various examples. By the state, Skocpol is often
referring to the various government officials that hold real power over
state policy and processes. Top military official in South American
governments, or government aristocracy in Prussia are used as examples.
In this formation, the state has some level of agency. These individuals
work collectively using state resources to create systems that entrench
their own power.

This same process is happening in the public administration corps in
liberal democracies. The policies are being constructed by the civil
servants, and they are framing the issues according the perspective of
the 'government bureaucracy'. This affect is more present in countries
such as the UK or Sweden which have long standing entrenched public
administrations. State autonomy is not a fixed feature of any country's
government. It depends on the time and environmental factors.

If states have some autonomy, then for them to execute some policy, we
need to have an understand of their capabilities. There are specific
factors that come into play. The most basic ones are relative to state
power. How much control does the state have the region or policy area?
Then does the state have the necessary resources? What is the current
structural system for the state to actuate its wishes? Taken together
these factors are often called the "policy instrument" for a specific
policy goal or area. (18)

In addition to power and resources there are also socioeconomic factors
that constrain states. In effect the interests of powerful sections of
society drive and constrain states. States have a difficult time bucking
the desires of powerful industry groups, and often will align the state
itself toward the most powerful interests.

**States and Patterns of Politics**

The very structure of the state itself has an impact on society. It
impacts certain patterns of activities, creates a dominant political
culture, affects group formation, and effects idea generation. To
understand this effect, the lion's-share doesn't come from government
officials (though they do matter) but rather the structure of the state
itself, intentionally and unintentionally, creates the effect.

Most research in this area has focused on the differences between
western European states and the US. The 'stateness' of the different
countries affects how individuals conceptualize political ideas. One
example is the difference between the UK and US on the idea of
sovereignty. The UK conceptualizes that sovereign authority over the UK
as the Parliament itself. Whereas the US place that power in the
constitution rather any specific governmental institution. (22) As such,
legitimacy of new ideas in the US are constantly being compared to
favorable interpretations of the constitution.

Beyond ideas or conceptions of politics, the state directly affects
types of actions. Political movements and activities are directly
influenced by the structures in the state. The effect of federalism
directly changes that way society understands its relationship to state
power.

Often comparative examples presented by Skocpol are fixated on a similar
movement in two countries. One example is the rise of workers movements
in mid-1800s in Britain and France. Britain overall experienced gradual
change through parliament as workers became mobilized into political
parties. But in France, these workers had largescale protest and
militant behavior. One explanation is that France was a much more
centralized government, which meant that workers felt that the only
possible remedy was through direct protest. (26)
