# Metadata
## Identifiers
title:  THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF AFRICA'S SLAVE TRADES
author(s): NATHAN #NUNN
year: #y2008
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Development #Trade #Africa 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

**THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF AFRICA'S SLAVE TRADES\***

**NATHAN NUNN (2008)**

**Abstract**

Can part of Africa's current underdevelopment be explained by its slave
trades? To explore this question, I use data from shipping records and
historical documents reporting slave ethnicities to construct estimates
of the number of slaves exported from each country during Africa's slave
trades. I find a robust negative relationship between the number of
slaves exported from a country and current economic performance. To
better understand if the relationship is causal, I examine the
historical evidence on selection into the slave trades and use
instrumental variables. Together the evidence suggests that the slave
trade had an adverse effect on economic development.

**Introduction**

There are reasons to expect that the slave trades may have been at least
as important as official colonial rule for Africa's development. For a
period of nearly 500 years, from 1400 to 1900, the African continent
simultaneously experienced four slave trades. By comparison, official
colonial rule lasted from 1885 to about1960, a total of approximately 75
years. I construct measures of the number of slaves exported from each
country in Africa in each century between1400 and 1900. The estimates
are constructed by combining data from ship records on the number of
slaves shipped from each African port or region with data from a variety
of historical documents that report the ethnic identities of slaves that
were shipped from Africa. I find a robust negative relationship between
the number of slaves exported from each country and subsequent economic
performance. The African countries that are the poorest today are the
ones from which the most slaves were taken. This finding cannot be taken
as conclusive evidence that the slave trades *caused* differences in
subsequent economic development. An alternative explanation that is just
as plausible is that countries that were initially the most economically
and socially underdeveloped selected into the slave trades, and these
countries continue to be the most underdeveloped today.

**Historical Background**.

The total effect of the slave trades, according to calculations by
Patrick Manning (1990, p. 171), was that by 1850 Africa's population was
only half of what it would have been had the slave trades not taken
place. Africa's slave trades were also unique because, unlike previous
slave trades, individuals of the same or similar ethnicities enslaved
one another. This had particularly detrimental consequences, including
social and ethnic fragmentation, political instability and a weakening
of states, and the corruption of judicial institutions. The most common
manner in which slaves were taken was through villages or states raiding
one another. Because of this process, the slave trades may be an
important factor explaining Africa's high level of ethnic
fractionalization today. This is significant for economic development
given the established relationship between ethnic fractionalization and
long-term economic growth (Easterly and Levine 1997).

Historians named "gun-slave cycle", a group sell slave to obtain a mean
of protection (gun, sword) and eventually enslave each other and even
within communities (Lovejoy 2000). Prior to the slave trades, complex
state systems were in the process of evolving.

However, this evolution stagnated soon after the arrival of the
Portuguese in the 15th century (Barry 1998).

Klein (2001, p. 59) writes that communities began enslaving their own.
Judicial penalties that formerly had taken the form of beatings, payment
of compensation or exile, for example, were now converted to
enslavement. Often, leaders themselves supported or even instigated this
abuse of the judicial system. (Some scholars seems arguing that the idea
of Slave as commodity was brought by Western conqueror because
equivalent word as slave did not exist in Africa before conqueror
arrives).

**SLAVE EXPORT DATA**

I use two types of data to construct the slave export estimates. The
first are data that report the total number of slaves exported from each
port or region in Africa. I refer to these as shipping data. For the
trans-Atlantic slave trade, the data are from the updated version of the
Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database constructed by Eltis et al. (1999).
The database records information for 34,584 voyages from 1514 to 1866.
With the shipping data one can calculate the number of slaves that were
shipped from each coastal country. However, this does not give an
accurate indication of where slaves were originally captured. Slaves
shipped from the ports of a coastal country may have come from a country
located further inland. To estimate the number of slaves shipped from
the coast that came from inland countries, I also use a second source of
data that reports the ethnic identity of slaves shipped from Africa.
After the data have been constructed, I have estimates of the number of
slaves shipped from each country in Africa during each of the four slave
trades during four different time periods:1400-1599, 1600-1699,
1700-1799, 1800-1900.

**BASIC CORRELATIONS: OLS ESTIMATES**

For a country initially with the mean level of income of \$1,249, a
one-standard-deviation decrease in the slave export variable will raise
income to \$1,864, which is a 50% increase in income.

**ECONOMETRIC ISSUES: CAUSALITY AND MEASUREMENT ERROR**

**Historical Evidence**

Still, it remains unclear whether the slave trades have a causal impact
on current income (observational data have chicken or egg first
problem). I pursue two strategies to evaluate whether there is a causal
effect of the slave trades on income. First, using historic data and
qualitative evidence from African historians, I evaluate the importance

and characteristics of selection into the slave trades. As I will show,
the evidence suggests that selection was important, but it was usually
the societies that were the most prosperous, not the most
underdeveloped, that selected into the slave trades. Sustained trade did
not occur until the Portuguese found the Kongo kingdom, located just
south of the Zaire river. Because the Kongo kingdom had a centralized
government, a national currency, and well-developed markets and trading
networks, it was able to support trade with the Europeans. When European
demand turned almost exclusively to slaves, the preference to trade with
the most developed parts of Africa continued. Because the more
prosperous areas were also the most densely populated, large numbers of
slaves could be efficiently.

**Instrumental Variables**

The second strategy that I pursue is to use instruments that are
correlated with slave exports, but are uncorrelated with other country
characteristics. valid. According to the known history of the slave
trades, it was the location of demand that influenced the location of
supply and not vice versa. Being further from slave markets was good for
growth.

Conclusion: It seems that history of slave trade affect later economic
growth. (Nunn tries to undermine alternative explanation he can think of
in this instrumental and historical evidence chapter).
