# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Conceptualizing Culture: Possibilities for Political Science
author(s): Lisa #Wedeen
year: #y2002 
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Culture #Paradigms 
keywords: 

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

**Lisa Wedeen**

**"Conceptualizing Culture: Possibilities for Political Science"**

The term culture thus far has been misused in the field of Political
Science, according to the author. Influenced by the works of such giants
like Geertz or Huntington, culture is mainly understood as a static
concept. A culture becomes a group of people with a certain set of
attributes. Usually focused on political culture within the field,
cultural traits are used to shallowly explain why progress was enabled
or hindered.

Critics within the field have pointed out the tautological nature of
cultural explanations or have put into question the empirical validity
of such inquiry. The rise of individualism and rational choice theory in
the mid 1980s, which do not focus on groups but (duh) the individual,
further advanced a notion that researching political culture might be
unnecessary. Wedeen additionally notes that culture is oftentimes used
as a fallback explanation, when essentially everything else fails.

But reversing the understanding of culture, as a practice of meaning
making, Wedeen hopes to convince the reader that culture can produce
insights into politics and their outcomes - essentially creating useful
causal arguments.

She advocates for an anthropological understanding of the concept of
culture:

**"To study culture in the critical anthropological sense is to explore
the processes of meaning-construction (semiotic practices) in which
people's practices and their material realities - their political,
economic, and social situations - operate in *dialectical relationship*
\[emphasis added\] with their systems of signification." (719)**

These semiotic practices operate at two levels:

1)  Culture refers to what languages and symbols do, how they are
    inscribed in concrete actions and how they operate to produce
    observable political effects (used as causal or explanatory
    variable; can also be seen as results of arrangements and then
    become dependent variables);

2)  Culture as semiotic practices functions as a new lens:
    practice-oriented approach can help determine how "identity" is
    formed, why some practices work better than others, etc. (nuanced
    understanding of politics)

Before she goes into providing examples and explanations, the author
provides a brief (more in-depth) overview how culture has been
understood in Political Science so far.

-   Huntington's understanding of culture as primordial trait â†’ neglects
    solidarity and fluidity that exists among groups, ignores historical
    process and specific political relations, insists on permanence of
    specific ideas

-   Rational choice theory uses culture similarly: exogenous traits,
    community can be studied by listing shared beliefs/values

-   General confusion within the literature: on one hand used as an
    analytical concept, on the other still stuck in the primordial
    assumptions

-   Authors references Political Scientists' insistence on Geertz'
    research (author praises his advancing the notion of culture and the
    importance of ethnography), as he defined "system of symbols" as
    something permanent (which is confusing at best), which allows to
    create a master narrative about a specific culture

A common rift within Political Science is the division between rational
choice theorists and interpretive social scientists, mainly based on the
importance an individual plays in analyses of political life (717).

In rational choice theory the individual is the preferred unit of
analysis (even though later aggregated) which is at odds with the notion
that culture is not essentially a "property of individuals" (717). It's
taking ideas and values (i.e. national pride) out of the context they
are embedded in.

Interpretivist approaches (such as practice anthropology) talk about an
agentive individual, who is not maximizing, cost-benefit calculator, and
who is not removed from historical processes. Obviously, these two
assumptions about the individual are hard to combine.

Instead of understanding culture as a constraint (as rational choice
theorists do), it should be conceptualized as meaning-producing, in
which individuals understands themselves **"as individuals and
strategic, and as group members and nonstrategic, and that such
self-understandings are mutually constituted and affirmed by others"
(717).**

**(**It sort of combines both the exaggerated importance of culture by
culturalists and the underwhelming account by political analysis).

Fear not, though, as there is hope for collaboration!

The author points out that game theorists, for instance, have begun to
use the "common knowledge" as a variable in their analysis. Common
knowledge is seen as a "**focal point around which actors' expectations
can converge, thereby limiting transaction costs and enhancing the
possibilities for coordination under conditions of complexity and
uncertainty"** (718).

Such an assumption, however, does not come from an understanding of
culture (based on human activity), but more from knowledge which is
considered to be "common" (see Schelling trainstation example).

So far, muddled understanding amongst game theorists or other social
scientists what common knowledge actually is, how it is formed, what
actions contribute to it, etc. Does "knowing it" mean the same to
everybody? Does it help for political conforming? How does resistance
fit into that picture? The author rejects the reliance on common
knowledge as a point of explanation. Similar to the misused
understanding of culture, it is seen as a frozen concept.

Let's get back to Wedeen's pitch: culture is dynamic. Culture is a
meaning-making process. **"Culture designates a way of looking at the
world that requires an account of how symbols operate in practice, why
meanings generate action, and why such actions produce meanings, when
they do." (720)**

By changing the way scientists look at culture (again: not static),
political scientists can ask novel questions and find original answers
(sales pitch).

Now to the "how-to":

**"Understanding semiotic practices requires an analysis of the ways in
which people use words, establish and interpret signs, and act in the
world in ways that foster intelligibility." (720)**

Intelligibility works on several levels.

-   Sometimes without much knowledge of language and context certain
    types of practices are comprehensive, meanings can be ascribed and
    described

-   Then follows the interpretation of the observed practice which needs
    to be intune with the community's understanding

**"Intelligibility does not presuppose grasping an inner essence or
getting into the heads of informants." (721)**

Countering a claim of lack of generalizability (due to such a deep dive)
especially in comparative politics, the author recommends to look at
multiple cases of habits and usage (doesn't have to be tied to just one
nation-state).

When one understands that meaning-production is a process through which
"conventions become intelligible to participants through observable
usages and effects suggests that meanings are open to various and
changing interpretations" (721), the responsibilities of the researcher
might then expand to not just identifying what symbols or practices
exist or what they mean, but how a changing symbol or practice can
impact political outcomes (authors uses the example of an in depth study
of patriotism through the practice of pledging allegiance).

Intelligibility is different from common knowledge as it does not assume
conditions (but observes them). It suggests only a minimal sense of what
is shared amongst people (to have some sort of stability) rather than
quite integrated concepts (that common knowledge assumes).

Meaning implies intelligibility, which is "**produced through and
compounded by repeated, context-dependent use that is observable"**.
(722)

To highlight the importance of understanding culture as a dialectic
relationship between people's practices and systems of signification as
potentially independent factors in PoliSci research, the author provides
two case studies she has worked on in the past.

1)  Case study 1 one looks at the "cult"-like following of Syria's
    President Hafiz al-Asad (1970-2000). The author argues in it that
    two particular semiotic practices (official speeches and ironic
    distancing strategies by the citizens) lead to producing political
    compliance. Common wisdom might assume that speeches and slogans
    would create legitimacy or enforce some sort of charims the leader
    might have had (additionally coercive threat of punishment). Yet,
    the author argues that by looking in-depth into the practices one
    can see that the daily empty slogans and speeches of the regime
    supposedly drained the citizens' political energy. At the same time,
    the regime allowed the spreading of comics, movies, TV shows that
    made fun of the regime, allowing citizens to acknowledge that
    potential resistance or apathy to the system might be more
    widespread than previously assumed. They no longer felt isolated.
    Their shared unbelief, however, made them compliant to the
    situation. Choosing to stay away from politics due to unbelief in
    the leader and the political situation enforces compliance, which in
    the end matters politically.

2)  The second case study looks at identity formation and ethnic
    violence in political science. Taking groups as imagined communities
    with static traits, one falls once again into the tautological
    explanations of **"interethnic tensions is caused by tensions of
    interethnicity"** (724). However, ethnicity might be less
    objectively real than assumed (no shit sherlock). The author uses a
    study conducted by Liisaa Maliki, who investigated various refugee
    camps established after the Burundi massacres, in which refugees
    identified themselves either as "pure" Hutu. Refugees living outside
    the camps did not. A semiotic practices approach would look at
    everyday practices and rhetoric of belonging within the camps and
    outside to. A dataset, for instance, could be established which
    represented the intensity level of those exchanges. The author
    criticizes the more common practices in research today, where ethnic
    groups are coded through "objective" measures (static traits, i.e.
    language- belonging). "**By taking culture as semiotic practices
    seriously, causal accounts will be more nuanced and precise, even if
    an accurate coding schema for large datasets eludes social
    scientists intent on constructing one.**" (725)

In her conclusion, Wedeen admits that the bridge between interpretivists
and rational choice theorists might be too large to bridge (their
epistemological concerns might just be too far apart). However, a
re-approach to the understanding of culture might make people on both
sides of this conversation able to find answers to novel questions and
provide better explanations for political outcomes and effects.
