
# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: 
author(s): Barbara #Geddes
year: #y2003
citation: Barbara Geddes, *Paradigms and Sand Castles: Theory Building and
Research Design in Comparative Politics* (University of Michigan Press,
2003), chapter 5 (pp. 175-211).
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Rational_Choice #Paradigms 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary


Barbara Geddes, *Paradigms and Sand Castles: Theory Building and
Research Design in Comparative Politics* (University of Michigan Press,
2003), chapter 5 (pp. 175-211).

There is a tension between traditional values of the comparative field
and rational choice scholars.

Classic comparativists invested a lot in deeper understanding of the
subject (history, society, culture) which is often ignored in
rationalist papers. On the other hand, rationalists' tools are very
useful for theory building.

**Distinguishing features of Rational Choice (RC):**

Unit of analysis: individual who is rational so he/she will choose
behavior that maximize his/her chances to achieve his/her goals.

Institutions and other structural variables (such as ethnic division,
status of peasantry, specific political circumstances) enter rational
calculus as a second-order preferences. In other words, those factors
determine alternatives from which an individual may choose.

First order factors are the goals of each individual

**Misconceptions about RC**

-   [Inherently conservative (politically)]{.underline} -- People think
    so because many economists use RC and they don't believe in
    governmental intervention.

-   [Assumes that all people motivated by material
    interests]{.underline} -- This is wrong because it is the analyst
    who decides what are the goals of the individual and this, of
    course, means that the analyst can be wrong in his understanding of
    people's goals. Therefore, RC becomes less useful when the goals of
    the individuals are idiosyncratic.

But there is no prescription for the materialistic goals in the approach
itself. It just happens that a lot (but not all) of people's decision
can be attributed to material interests

RC assumes only three things:

-   Individual choose the means that are most likely to result in
    desired end

-   Individual can rank their goals/preferences

-   Consistent (A is better than B and B is better than C so A is better
    than C)

> So the ability of the analyst to attribute plausible goals of the
> individuals a priori limits the domain in which RC can be used.

-   [Assumes people's preferences are stable]{.underline} -- RC requires
    only that people's preferences remain stable during the time it
    takes them to decide/choose something. The duration of the
    decision-making process often depends on the analyst's
    interpretation. There is also a confusion between goals (that are
    first-order preferences) and strategies for achieving those goals
    (second-order preferences). People often can change their
    second-order preferences but their goals remain the same. For
    instance, a politician may change their policy preferences but their
    goal to remain in the office remains the same.

-   [Based on unrealistic assumption that people are rational (can
    calculate costs and benefits) and have absolute
    information.]{.underline}

Author basically says this is true and because of this we can apply RC
only to situations where these requirements do not strain credulity. In
addition, people often behave as if they have full information and
calculating ability (even though they don't). People use strategies and
techniques to compensate lack of information or calculation ability
(heuristics).

> In order to make RC argument applicable we need following:

-   Goals of most of the actors in the field should be known (not only
    to analyst but to the actors)

-   The rules that govern interactions are precise and known to all

Most of the political behavior in democracies can be explained with RC

> RC is more useful in areas of high salience for individuals involved
> in the process (it implies that individuals will gather more
> information before important decision)

-   [Ahistorical and cannot take context into account]{.underline}

It is true that all theoretical approaches (not only RC) specify
variables that are relevant and ignore others. Context and History may
determine variables that are included or determine values of those
variables. RC just provide criteria which variables from the endless
possible options have to be included (only variables that are relevant
to this specific decision-making process) in each analysis we can add
contextual variables if we believe they have an impact on rational
calculus of the actors.

-   [Deterministic]{.underline}

RC claims can be written as follows:

If the actors have the goals that we think they have, and if the
information and calculation requirements are plausible, and if actors
face the rules and payoffs that we think they do, then certain behavior
will occur.

Some of the if conditions can be not accurate for some of the actors but
the tendency in general may still be correct.

-   [Cannot be use with path dependent models]{.underline}

Path dependent analysis assume that the choice made at time A affects
the choice at time B. Therefore, at time B the choice may look like it
is not rational.

This argument is similar to the argument that RC ignores history or
context. In addition, it may originate in misconception about
preferences of the first and second order mentioned above.

What really distinguish RC form other.

1.  Methodological individualism

2.  Explicit identification of actors, their goals and preferences.

3.  Explicit identification of institutions and contextual features that
    determines the options available to actors

4.  Deductive logic

**The use of RC --** *in this sections author describes different
research directions that utilize RC*

1.  In aggregating individual rational choice -- group decision is not
    necessary reflects the interest of the majority in the group.

-   *Cycles under majority rule and the effects of intralegislative
    institutions*

Kenneth Arrow showed that rules of decision making can influence a lot
the outcome of the decision. The implication of this findings is that
people who control the agenda may determine the outcome of group
decision. This has significant importance in political context
(legislative decision-making processes)

-   *Collective action problem*

Mancur Olson demonstrated the consequences of combination of RC logic
with attempts to promote public goods (*basically it is about free rider
problem*). He shows that there is rational logic in peoples' inaction
even if the cooperation will be beneficial for everyone.

This insight had a significant impact on our understanding of th group
politics.

For instance, if the public good distributed equally it is unlikely for
people to pursue it but if it will be distributed unequally those who
receive more may "carry" the price of political action.

Studies about "tragedy of the common" also originate from collective
action problem

2.  Inside the black box of State

Based on the assumption that politicians' goal is survival:

-   Do political representatives represent constituents or the most
    lobbying groups?

-   How instantiations constrain the interactions of politicians?

-   How do parties or candidates choose their policies?

-   How do political institutions work in new democracies?

-   Coalition formation in European parliamentary system.

3.  Strategic interaction among political actors -- based on game theory

In non-game theoretic argument individuals are constrained by
environment (institutions) while in game theory argument individuals'
takes into account both environment and strategic behavior of other
individuals.

One of the most famous use of game theory is Prisoner's dilemma (*I am
not summarizing this because I assume everybody knows what it is*).
Prisoner's dilemma is helpful in IR and coalition negotiations.

**Rational choice and the research frontier in Comparative politics.**

Since rational choice tries to find systemic patterns and tries to
minimize the number of explanatory variables it gives an advantage in
universal theory building.

Then author describe at length how rational choice can help understand
new democracies.
