# Metadata
## Identifiers
title:  Concept Misinformation in Comparative Politics
author(s): Giovanni #Sartori
year: #y1970
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Methodology #conceptualization #Qualitative #Quantitative 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

Giovanni Sartori: Concept Misinformation in Comparative Politics
(December 1970):**

Sartori **argues** that the political science profession is impaired by
"methodological unawareness," that is that political scientists lack
training in logic, and thus struggle with *logos*, or thinking about
thinking. Much of this article discusses the problems of levels of
analysis, generalizations, and concept-definition.

**I. The Travelling Problem:** Political scientists have inherited the
thinking of the previous generation and have not had to engage in "hard
thinking," while simultaneously politics has expanded into new spheres
of life. Thus, political scientists have had to resort "conceptual
stretching." We must ask ourselves whether it is necessary to embark on
worldwide comparisons? The reason we engage in these comparisons is
because of a methodological reason. We have poorly remedied the
conceptual stretching and have switched from asking "what is" questions
to "how much" questions.

**II. Quantification and Classification:** In some cases, we have abused
quantitative idioms; for example, calling a nominal scale a "scale of
measurement" when it is really a form of qualitative classification.
Political scientists also overuse the term "variable," applying it to
attributes that do not imply measurability. The point is, **argues**
Sartori, that we forget the concept formation stands prior to
quantification, and this begins with qualitative language -- the "how
much" questions are internal parts of the "what is" questions. If data
is part of "conceptual containers," then the empirical question is what
turns a concept valuable and valid container. Sartori uses the analogy
of social scientists going on fishing expeditions all across the world,
looking for data with inadequate nets. Concluding this section, Sartori
believes computing power does facilitate quantitative research
possibilities, but only if we do so with proper standardized logical
criterion.

**III. The Ladder of Abstraction**: Conception formation is a
proposition-forming and problem-solving activity; this section focuses
on "generalizations in disguise," especially its conceptual structure,
which is: (1) "observational terms," and (2) the "vertical disposition
of such terms along a ladder of abstraction." The ladder is like levels
of analysis, but Sartori has an issue with how we classify along the
ladder and move up or down it. The problem is underpinned by reference
to the distinction, and the relation between extension (denotation) and
intension (connotation).

-   **Extension** "is the class of things to which the word applies"

-   **Intension** of the word "is the collection of properties which
    determine the things to which the word applies."

-   **Denotation** of a word "is the totality of objects indicated by
    that word."

-   **Connotation** "is the totality of characteristics anything must
    possess to be in the denotation of that word.

There are two ways to climb the ladder: (1) to broad the extension of a
concept by diminishing its attributes or properties (reducing
connotation, aka generalizing\]), or (2) augmenting the extension
without diminishing the intension (which extended denotation while
obfuscating connotation). To climb the ladder, we make a concept "more
abstract and more general by lessening its properties or attributes."
Smelser uses the example of civil service, specifically moving up and
down to levels of "staff," "administration," and "bureaucracy." Sartori
believes that at least three "slices" or rungs on the ladder are needed
for the purposes of logical analysis. Furthermore, concepts should not
be extended/broadened "beyond the point at which at least one relatively
precise connotation is retained." Sartori also details the distinction
between (1) concepts defined by negation (what they are not), and (2)
concepts without negation. For a simplification and application of this
section see table 1 below from page 1044.

**IV. Comparative Fallacies: An Illustration:** Sartori begins this
section of using examples of fallacies by discussing
structural-functionalist approach and its problems of definition -- much
of the problems lies in definitions and the separation of political
function from political structure. In sum (p 1049), the
structural-functionalist scholar ignores the ladder of abstraction and
inadvertently destroys his own ladder in "reckless climbing." In the
second part of this section on fallacies, Sartori discusses the
categories of: pluralism, integration, participation, and mobilization.
We must first define them in terms of their original Western
experiential context before trying to apply them comparatively. In turn,
comparative misapplication may in turn confuse the level of analysis,
resulting in: (1) errors of interpretation, explanation, and prediction,
(2) wasteful data mis-gathering, and (3) confusion of meaning and
destruction of the original concepts.

**V. Summary:** The expansion of the scope and scale of comparative
politics has raised problems of method. Concepts are not only elements
of a theoretical system, but tools for data/fact-gathering. "The
empirical problem is that we badly need information which is
sufficiently precise to be meaningfully comparable." The theoretical
problem: "we grievously lack a disciplined use of terms and procedures
for comparison." The remedy: (1) to develop the discipline along a
medium level of abstraction with better intermediate categories, and (2)
to maneuver, both up and down, a ladder in a way to bring together
assimilation and differentiation, a relatively high explanatory power
and a theoretically precise descriptive content, macro-theory and
empirical testing.
