# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Designing Social Inquiry
author(s): #King, #Keohane, and #Verba
year: #y1994 
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Methodology #Quantitative #Statistics
keywords: 

## Body

from: 
cohort:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary





The Quantitative Challenge:

King, Keohane, and Verba, Designing Social Inquiry pp 3-9, 36-49,
115-149

Chapter 1: The Science in Social Science (3-9)

The books goal is, "designing research that will produce valid
inferences about social and political life."(3) It is a standard
methodology book, talking about how to pose questions, design research
projects, etc.

On the differences between quantitative and qualitative, they find that
the differences are about style and technique rather than some different
paradigm. So, they are trying to identify and explain an unifying logic.
**That logic is the Logic of Inference**. They find that the battling
between case studies vs statistic studies, nonsystematic. That people
are arguing over methods, rather than critiquing methods systematically.
But they dodge the question of positivism, they simply say that, "We
assume that it is possible to have some knowledge of the external world
but that such knowledge is always uncertain." So pretty positivist, but
not hardcore. With that assumption, they define Scientific research.

Scientific Research (7-9)\
1. "The goal is inference": Research is designed to make inferences
based on some empirical information. That can be a causal inference or a
descriptive inference.\
2. "The procedures are public", that the logic and methods of research
must be made explicit, so replication can occur, or at least be
sufficiently followed by the reader\
3. "The conclusions are uncertain", that the inference is just that.\
4. "The content is the method", the only thing that unifies observations
are the methods, not the conclusions\
\
Chapter 2 (36-49)\
Interpretation and Inference

Interpretivists are primarily concerned with the concept of verstehen,
understanding from the member's own perspective. This can only be
obtained with cultural immersion. This has made some interpretivists
claim that this is a different paradigm of research. And that only
through verstehen can true understanding of social phenomenon be known.
The authors disagree with this conclusion. They believe that immersion
in a subject matter is often crucial for the logic of inference. That
deep knowing can allow the researcher to formulate a deeper research
design. A properly stated hypothesis must be falsifiable. Knowledge of
norms or cultures allow us to interpret observations more fully.

Connected to this is the idea of case studies. Some interpretivists
would claim that explanation of an event is not designed (or possible)
to use that knowledge to study the general phenomenon. E.g. using the
French revolution to discuss all revolutions. The authors disagree. Of
course, each event is unique, but everything is unique, so that doesn't
matter. What matters is complexity. Is an event so complex that it is a
black sheep observation? Maybe then we shouldn't try to generalize that
phenomenon. But this process must be systematic, and systematically
simplifying observations to eliminate overly complex observations can be
part of the process. Case studies are involved in this process. They are
essential for understanding description, and particularly important in
areas of social science when the explanatory ability is weak.

2.2 Inference: The Scientific Purpose of Data Collection

"Inference is the process of using the facts we know to learn about
facts we do not know."(46) To narrow down the observation process, we
should be focusing on those observations which have implications for the
specific theories we are analyzing. The theory and the data will
interact in the process. Additionally, focusing on collecting data
around the specific hypothesis will make deciding on qualitative or
quantitative methods much clearer. The authors here are reiterating that
data collection should only be concerned with looking at the specific
question.

Chapter 4: Determining What to Observe (115-149)

"This chapter focuses on how we should select cases, or observations,
for our analysis."(115) A clear research design is the most crucial part
of causal inference. The authors conceptualize "how we expect to use our
evidence to make inferences."(118) The research design, established
before the actual concluding process, must determine how the data can be
used.\
Most of the time, in social science we are forced to use an
indeterminate research design, when an actual causal relationship cannot
be determined. In two cases, the design cannot be fixed. 1) "We have
more inferences to make than implications observed."(119) Essentially,
there are not enough examples of the phenomenon, so we are forced to
conclude that we cannot decide between causal relationships. 2) "We have
two or more explanatory variables in our data that are perfectly
correlated with each other".(119)

Experiments are a good option for a research design because they
eliminate selection bias, the treatment effect will be valid. But many
problems are not possible to answer with an experimental research
design. The Soviet Union cannot fall again. Therefore, when picking
between cases that are small N, sometimes a random selection is helpful.
But often researchers are limited by language or data, so in those cases
the research must acknowledge the non-randomness of the selection.

So, if we are dealing with small N scenarios, how do we mitigate
selection bias? The authors give some tips. The obvious thing to avoid
is purposefully selecting only cases which validate our hypothesis.
Therefore the "selection should allow for the possibility of at least
some variation on the dependent variable." (129) If the selection is so
small, and this isn't possible then the researcher must acknowledge that
the effect is going to be an overestimate.

(From 132-137 the authors just illustrate this in different disciplines
through a number of examples)

Another tip, "One can avoid bias by selecting cases based on the key
causal variable"(137) If the key variable is discrimination in schools,
then selecting schools with high discrimination and low discrimination
avoids bias.

Last Tip, "it is dangerous to select observations intentionally on the
basis of both the explanatory and dependent variables, because in so
doing, it is easy to bias the result inadvertently."

The authors conclude that in social science perfect research design is
impossible. Therefore, researchers need to be careful in avoiding
pitfalls in case selection. Ultimately, select cases based on the
explanatory variable, and let the dependent variable vary.
