# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Nested Analysis as a Mixed-Method Strategy for Comparative Research
author(s): Evan S. #Lieberman
year: #y2005
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Methodology #Mixed_Method #Qualitative #Quantitative 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary


Evan S. Lieberman: Nested Analysis as a Mixed-Method Strategy for
Comparative Research (August 2005):

Lieberman **argues** for the advantages of mixed-methods in comparative
research, specifically a "nested" research design. For example, using
statistical analyses to guide case selection for in-depth research or
used to provide additional tests of hypotheses generated from small-N
research. Lijphart identified a central flaw in the comparative method:
"many variables, small number of cases," and further scholars have
identified problems with selection biases, lack of systematic procedures
and inattention to alternative explanations. On the other hand, Sartori
warned that statistical approaches have their own problems with
"conceptual stretching." Lieberman wants to go beyond methodological
bickering and thus this article introduces and systematizes nested
analysis: a statistical analysis of a large sample combined with
in-depth case studies within the sample. Nested analysis is not just
learning lessons from qual and applying them to quant (or vice versa),
but rather deploying both tools simultaneously.

**Overview**

Important definitions:

-   Large-N Analysis (LNA): "A mode of analysis in which the primary
    causal inferences are derived from statistical analyses which
    ultimately lead to quantitative estimates of the robustness of a
    theoretical model."

-   Small-N Analysis (SNA): "A mode of analysis in which causal
    inferences about the primary unit under investigation are derived
    from qualitative comparisons of cases and/or process tracing of
    causal chains within cases across time, in which the relationship
    between theory and facts is captured largely in narrative form."

Nested analysis **assumes** an interest in *both* the exploration of
general relationships and explanations and the specific explanations of
individual cases and groups of cases. Lieberman also situates nested
analysis with QCA and Bayesian models saying both are incomplete and may
be used in the LNA, but SNA guidelines should still apply. Finally,
nested analysis is also "agnostic with respect to the source of theory
formation," meaning the analysis has no particular affinity for any
single theoretical approach and can be used both mathematically or not.

**Starting the Analysis: Preliminary LNA**: Prelim LNA provides
information that complements SNA findings and guides SNA execution --
the goal is to explore as many testable hypotheses as possible with
available theory and data (this can take the form of regression, QCA,
descriptive statistics, etc.). Available data should be used at this
stage, and independent data collection should only be done with very
strong initial hypotheses and great ability in measuring variables --
furthermore, avoid inserting any control variables that do not have a
clear theoretical justification (e.g., regional dummy variables). LNA's
core strength is its ability to simultaneously estimate the effects of
rival explanations and/or control variables on an outcome of interest --
"the ability to rule out a hypothesis in the LNA provides sound
justification for focusing on other explanations in the SNA." LNA also
provides a unique instrument for assessing the strength of partial
explanations or control variables -- prelim LNA is likely to find
variables that are significant predictors of the outcome under
investigation, even if they can account for only a limited portion of
variance.

**Assessing Findings of LNA: Robust and Satisfactory:** Much of LNA
assessment is subjective, but one important tool is central to nested
approach: "actual scores of the cases should be plotted geographically
relative to the predicted scores from the statistical estimate and with
names attached" -- this allows for goodness of model fit with available
cases -- the scholar must then decide if unexplained variance is random
noise or if a better model/explanation could be created. In other words,
location is important in comparative studies unlike in statistical
analyses of anonymous individuals. After LNA analysis -- scholar must
ask themselves if all important hypotheses were tested and were the
results robust/satisfactory -- the answer then informs the approach to
SNA.

**Nesting Intensive SNA into the Analysis**: The best use of SNA is to
leverage its distinct complementarities with LNA, not trying to
implement it in the same way as a regression. The ultimate goal is to
make inferences about the unit of analysis that is shared between the
LNA and SNA -- to do this "nested analysis requires a *shifting* of
levels of analysis because the SNA component demands an examination of
*within-*case processes and/or variation. SNA should be used to answer
questions left open by LNA, whether due to insufficient data or the
nature of causal order could not be inferred. Note that while SNA and
LNA do require different kinds of datasets (e.g., the inclusion of
documents, interview, etc. in SNA), SNA could still be quantitative.
Also note, that the goal of SNA is to increase depth, not breadth of
case studies -- that is that more energy should be devoted to individual
case studies rather than cover as many cases as possible. Don't force
SNA to doe what LNA does. Finally, focus SNA based on specific
findings/analysis of LNA.

**Model-Testing SNA (Mt-SNA):** "The use of SNA in nested analysis
should aim to gain contextually based evidence that a particular causal
model or theory actually 'worked' in the manner specified by the model."
SNA aims to verify the plausibility of stated mechanisms -- to
demonstrate with the "logic of a compelling narrative that in the
*absence* of a particular cause, it would have been difficult to imagine
the observed outcome." In Mt-SNA scholars should use resources on
researching/analyzing the statistically significant results while
addressing two types of rival explanations: (1) if strong hypotheses
could not be considered in LNA due to lack of cross-country data, then
case studies should be used to address them, and (2) verification that
cause preceded the effect due to limited LNA temporal scope.

**Model-Building SNA (Mb-SNA):** Used when state of theory is
weak/refuted by LNA, or if quality of cross-country data is insufficient
to address chief hypotheses. "Mb-SNA involves using various case
materials to develop well-specific theoretical accounts of cross-country
variation on the outcome of interest." Mb-SNA can be used to address
poor "off-the-shelf" LNA available datasets. Mb-SNA has advantages over
non-nested SNA approaches: (1) scholar already has useful if partial LNA
explanatory information, (2) Mb-SNA can focus on accounting for
estimated differences between cases, or between cases and some central
tendency of the population, and (3) the nested approach may induce
clearer concepts and models than non-nested approach.

**Case Selection Strategies for SNA:**

-   **Selecting Cases Relative to the Preliminary Model ("On" or
    "Off-the-Line")**

    -   Mt-SNA -- scholars should only select cases that are well
        predicted by the best fitting statistical model -- the goal is
        to assess strength of a model.

        -   One should select cases based on the widest variation on the
            independent variables that are central to the model -- goal
            is to demonstrate robustness of causal argument.

    -   Mb-SNA -- at least one case that has not been well predicted by
        the best-fitting statistical model should be selected.

        -   Case selection involves selection based upon the dependent
            variable -- central goal is to account for important
            patterns of variation on the outcome.

-   **Selecting Cases Randomly or Deliberately**

    -   Mt-SNA -- randomly may be desirable (would eliminate selection
        bias) -- but based on pragmatism.

        -   Deliberate selection is possible but should avoid cases that
            informed initial theory development before prelim LNA.

    -   Mb-SNA -- randomly should be avoided but deliberate selection
        also has its pitfalls (biases and limitations).

**Assessing the Findings of the SNA: Need for Further Nesting:**
Cyclical studies should be avoided. Two clear endpoints: (1) for Mt-SNA,
if one or more intensive case studies can demonstrate the validity of
the theoretical model by plausibly linking cause and effect, then nested
analysis did its job. (2) For Mb-SNA,if a coherent theoretical
explanation for the outcomes cannot be formulated, this also implies a
natural endpoint. Lieberman also details what to do when the Mt-SNA fits
poorly (pp 448-449), or when the Mb-SNA suggests a new model (449-450).

**Conclusion:** "Nested analysis provides a stronger basis for causal
inference than the small of the SNA and LNA parts." Using mixed
strategies helps overcome sources of bias and sort out spurious findings
that might be produced in SNA or LNA isolation. Nested analysis is well
suited to cross-national analysis where both general patterns and
specific country analysis is of interest (e.g., voting behavior).

-   what is theu
