# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: 
author(s):
year:
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

**"Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War"**

**(American Political Science Review, February 2003)**

*Jenny: apologies for the length of the summary, quite the dense
article, I could have easily just copied and pasted the whole thing in
here*

-   Common "conventional wisdom" holds that after the end of the Cold
    War, the number of civil wars increased rapidly

-   The authors counter that "the current prevalence of internal wars is
    mainly the result of a steady accumulation of protracted conflicts
    since the 1950s and 1960s" (75)

<!-- -->

-   **Key criteria for civil war and to be counted in data** (76):

    -   1\) involved fighting between agents of a state and organized,
        nonstate groups who sought to either take control of government,
        control of a region, or to use violence to change government
        policies

    -   2\) the conflict killed at least 1000 over its course, yearly
        average at least 100

    -   3\) at least 100 were killed on both sides (including civilians
        attacked by rebels) → to rule out massacres

-   Criteria broadly similar to the Correlates of War (COW) project,
    Doyle and Sambanis data set, and several others (76)

-   The authors, however, established their own list of 161 countries
    that had a population of at least half a million people in 1990.

-   *On page 76 you can find secondary criteria 4-9 in the footnotes to
    deal with coding issues*

-   *Per se, no reason to exclude anticolonial wars, complexity of the
    including them though, as i.e. estimates about GDP for entire
    empires need to made, they analyze data both with and without
    anticolonial wars*

<!-- -->

-   **Their findings are** (75):

    -   1\) the prevalence of civil war in the 1990s is not due to the
        end of the Cold War and its associated changes in the
        international system

    -   2\) it appears not to be true that a greater degree of ethnic or
        religious diversity - or any particular cultural demography - by
        itself makes a country more prone to civil war

    -   3\) the authors find little evidence that one can predict where
        a civil war will break out by looking for where ethnic or broad
        political grievances are strongest

    -   4\) the main factors determining both the secular trend and the
        cross-sectional variation in civil violence in this period are
        ... **[conditions that favor insurgency]{.underline}**

        -   Insurgency is a technology of military conflict
            characterized by small, lightly armed bands practicing
            guerilla warfare from rural base areas

        -   Can be harnessed to diverse political agendas, motivations,
            and grievances

        -   The authors argue that "*financially, organizationally, and
            politically weak governments render insurgency more feasible
            and attractive due to weak local policing or inept and
            corrupt counterinsurgency practices"* (75/76)

            -   Proxy government weakness (state administration,
                military and police capabilities) through per capita
                income

        -   Insurgency (on the rebel side) is favored by **[rough
            terrain, local knowledge superior to the government (to
            threaten potential denunciatory), and large
            population]{.underline}**

        -   Cultural diversity and grievances fail to explain civil war
            outbreaks

**Descriptive Statistics:**

-   Between 1945 and 1999, 127 civil wars (meeting their criteria) took
    place that killed at least 1000 people in 73 states (total dead as
    direct result of these wars 16.2 million)

-   13 of which were anticolonial wars

-   Largest number of wars began in 1990s (31), then 1960s (19) and
    1970s (25)

-   Most civil wars occurred in Sub-Saharan Africa (34), Asia (33), NEMA
    (17), Latin America (15), Eastern Europe and former USSR (13), and
    "the West" (2)

-   Rate of outbreak highest in Asia, 3 per 100 country years (on
    average amongst all countries, outbreak rate 1.92 per 100 country
    years)

**Trends over Time:**


height="2.676824146981627in"}

-   Prevalence not due to cold war, 1999 level already reached in 1980

-   Since 1945 outbreak rate 2.31/year, no significant trend up or down,
    increase stems from ending rate of 1.85 → almost linear accumulation

-   Average duration of civil war increased from 2 years in 1947 to 15
    years in 1999

**Some Lit review:**

-   During Cold War rebellion traced to economic inequality

-   After Cold War culturalist perspective became dominant (ethnic
    nationalism)

    -   Perennialist theories: stress long-standing cultural practices
        to define and distinguish ethnic groups → differences make
        conflict more likely

    -   Modernist theories: economic modernization and the development
        of the modern state make upward mobility possible, but
        contingent on sharing the culture of the group that dominates
        state or society → barriers for minorities should increase
        likelihood for conflict

**Many hypotheses:**

-   If ethnic diversity the cause for civil war:

    -   H1: Measures of country's ethnic or religious diversity should
        be associated with a higher risk of civil war. (measures on page
        78, bottom right)

    -   H2: The effect of ethnic diversity on a probability of civil war
        should increase at higher levels of per capita income (a proxy
        for economic modernization). (measures p. 79 top left corner)

    -   H3: Countries with an ethnic majority and a significant ethnic
        minority are at greater risk for civil war (this aligns with
        Horowitz (1985)). (p. 79 top left corner)

<!-- -->

-   If (political grievances) the cause for civil war (proxy: democracy,
    discriminatory policies, economic inequality):

    -   H4: Measures of political democracy and civil liberties should
        be associated with lower risks of civil war onset.

    -   H5: Policies that discriminate in favor of a particular language
        or religion should raise the risk of civil war onset in states
        with religious or linguistic minorities.

    -   H6: Greater income inequality should be associated with higher
        risks of civil war onset.

    -   (measures on 79)

<!-- -->

-   Additionally: if ethnic wars more likely as ethnic diversity
    increases among countries that have at least one nontrivial ethnic
    minority (*as far as I understand it is to narrow down the scope)*:

    -   H7: Among countries with an ethnic minority comprising at least
        5% of the population, greater ethnic diversity should associate
        with a higher risk of ethnic civil war.

<!-- -->

-   *Now looking at their argument of insurgencies:*

-   Numerical weakness of insurgents implies that in order to survive
    rebels must hide from government forces:

    -   H8: The presence of (a) rough terrain (mountainous), poorly
        served by roads, at a distance from the centers of the state
        power, should favor insurgency and civil war. So should the
        availability of (b) foreign, cross-border sanctuaries and © a
        local population that can be induced not to denounce the
        insurgents to government agents.

-   Their survival depends as well on the capabilities and capacities of
    the government:

    -   H9: Proxies for the relative weakness or strength of the
        insurgents - their odds of being killed or captured for a given
        level of counterinsurgency efforts by the government - should be
        associated with the likelihood that a country develops a civil
        war. In particular, a higher per capita income should be
        associated with a lower risk of civil war onset because (a) it
        is a proxy for a state's overall financial, administrative,
        police and military capabilities, and (b) it will mark more
        developed countries with terrain more "disciplined" by roads and
        rural society more penetrated by central administration.

    -   (they add © as an addendum: recruiting young men to the life of
        a guerilla is easier when the economic alternatives are worse)

<!-- -->

-   Additionally: factors that would be expected to affect (or proxy)
    the strength of an insurgent band relative to a state (enjoy):

-   And then lastly (to contrast H4-H6):

    -   H11: After controlling for per capita income (or other measures
        of state strength), neither political democracy, the presence of
        civil liberties , higher income inequality, nor
        nondiscriminatory linguistic or religious policies should
        associate strongly with lower odds at civil war. Given the right
        environmental conditions, insurgencies can thrive on the basis
        of small numbers of rebels without strong, widespread, popular
        support rooted in grievances, and hence, even in democracies.

**Empirical analysis:**

1)  Are more diverse countries prone to civil war?

-   Data disqualifies H1 and H2, ethnic diversity may indirectly affect
    conflict, but its more GDP that determines prone-ness (this data
    omits anticolonial wars)

2\) Multivariate results:

-   They start going through individual variables, I will briefly
    summarize below (per order in the article) whether they are
    significant or insignificant in determining the onset of civil war.
    The different models include various datasets, which were coded
    differently.



**Per capita income:** strongly significant

**Ethnic and religious composition:** insignificant (H3 byebye)

**Ethnic War:** strong effect of per capita income remains when
attention restricted to only "ethnic wars" (Model 2) (H7 byebye)

**Democracy and Civil Liberties:** insignificant (H4 byebye, H11 holds),
Anocracies (Model 3) = weak regimes, lacking the resources to be
autocrats or containing unstable mix of political forces that make them
unable to crush rebels → in those instances likelihood of civil war
onset higher.

**Linguistic and Religious Discrimination:** insignificant (added to
model 3)

**Inequality:** insignificant (limitation though: poor inequality data
available)

**New States and Political Instability:** significant (H10a holds)

**Mountains and Noncontiguous Territory:** significant (H10e holds)

**Population:** larger size more prone but not because of ethnic
diversity

Oil, Islam, Young Males: if at least ⅓ of export revenues from fossil
fuels doubles odds of civil war (H10h holds); due to that being mostly
ME countries they test for impact of Islam, which is insignificant,
Model 3 also controls for proportion of males age 15-24, which provides
some significance but not stable enough apparently

**Foreign Support (civil war next door):** insignificant (phenomenon too
common)

*Other variables and robustness check:*

**Anticolonial Wars**: Model 4, omits democracy and religious
fractionalization, ethnic diversity causing civil wars still slim,

**Regional affect:** Dummy variable in Model 3 → insignificant

Period and Fixed Effects: general upward risk trend since 1940s, median
incomes start rising (doubled by 1999), should in Model 3 reduce odds
for onset. Since it doesn't, the authors are slightly puzzled by the
fact that income does not reduce risk (name (only) potential other
reasons on p87: increase of international inequality, greater
availability of small arms, diffusion of insurgency "know-how")

**Primary commodity exports:** Other datasets say there is a threshold
up to which risk is maximized (approx. 32% of GDP), beyond that revenue
gains available to state large enough to make civil war less likely →
Fearon and Laitin don't find anything similar (when added to Model 3),
not a good measure for financing potential rebel groups

Trade openness: insignificant

**Alternative definitions and coding for civil war:**

-   Death threshold potentially too low

-   Tried other coding schemes with different data sets (model 5)

    -   But in general relatively large overlap with these different
        data sets

**Conclusion:**

1)  The prevalence of internal war in the 1990s is mainly the result of
    an accumulation of protracted conflicts since the 1950s rather than
    a sudden change associated with a new, post- Cold War international
    system.

2)  State weakness (poverty, large populations, instability) is a
    favorable condition for insurgency. It is a better predictor than
    indicators of ethnic and religious diversity or measures of
    grievances.

3)  Additionally, what matters is the terrain of the country (allowing
    the ability to hide) and low economic possibilities, making the life
    of a rebel attractive to them.

4)  Policy implications for the structural causes of civil war are
    twofold. Implementing democracy and tolerance are a fun tool, but
    they shouldn't be seen as the magic bullet for all problems.
    Addressing grievances of the population is key, although many
    grievances are the result of a civil war (key rebel strategy and a
    huge problem for fixing civil war). A key policy to prevent civil
    war is the creation of a well-financed and administratively
    competent government. For IOs and NGOs this means to develop
    programs that improve legal accountability within developing world
    militaries and police forces. The authors also suggest to make aid
    to fight civil wars conditional on states observing
    counterinsurgency practices that do not help recruit militias (89).
    If they do not comply, they should be left out hanging. If there are
    major implications for regional stability or international
    terrorism, these countries should be viewed as candidates for
    "neotrusteeship" (oof) under UN or other regional IOs.
