# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Ethnic Conflict and Civic Life: Hindus and Muslims in India
author(s): Ashutosh #Varshney
year: #y2002 
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Ethnicity #Civil_Society #Culture #Violence 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary




Ashutosh Varshney, Ethnic Conflict and Civic Life: Hindus and Muslims in
India

Puzzle: Why do some Indian cities with diverse ethnic groups have ethnic
violence while others remain peaceful?

Research Design:

1\. Varshney settles on cities as the unit of analysis for several
reasons:

-   rural ethnic violence accounted for few communal violence deaths,
    but eight cities account for 49 percent of urban deaths and 45
    percent of all deaths.

-   "India's Hindu-Muslim violence is city specific" (7).

2\. Selects three pairs of cities where communal violence is endemic and
rare or absent; each pair is selected by similarity according to three
control variables.

-   Pair 1: Aligarh and Calicut - based on **population percentages
    only**

-   Pair 2: Hyderabad and Lucknow - based on population percentages,
    **previous Muslim rule, and reasonable cultural similarities**

-   Pair 3: Ahmedabad and Surat - based on population percentages,
    pervious Muslim rule, reasonable cultural similarities, **same
    geography in state of Gujarat, sharing history, language and culture
    but not endemic communal violence.**

Goal: Can one find cases where similar demographic distributions lead to
very different forms of political behavior?

**Argument:**

-   Cities with more active pre-existing local networks of civic
    engagement between Hindu and Muslim communities have less and better
    managed ethnic conflict; those lacking such networks have much more
    ethnic violence.

-   2 Types of engagement in networks: **Associational** and
    **everyday** forms of engagement

-   Both help reduce ethnic conflict, but associational engagement has
    much stronger capacity to do so.

    -   Tim Note: Today, the field refers to associational engagement as
        "bridging social capital" and every day ties as "bonding social
        capital"

**Two Mechanisms link civic networks and ethnic conflict:**

-   Communication between members of different religious communities
    makes peace possible, killing rumors, sharing info with local
    administration, etc.

-   Higher associational engagement also ties together Hindu and Muslim
    businesses, building economic incentives into social reciprocity;
    neighborhood warmth on its own doesn't stop ethnic conflict, but the
    broader effects of social networks do

-   Informal/everyday engagement works in villages, but to reduce ethnic
    violence in cities, you really need associational ties. "Civic
    organizations become the ears and arms of the local administration"
    (11).

**Scope Conditions:**

-   Applicable to riots, not pogroms or civil wars

Figure 1. Exogenous Shock → Intracommunal engagement → communal violence

\| → Intercommunal engagement → communal peace

Past arguments looked at institutional arguments, suggesting that
federal, unitarian, single-member, multiple-member representation, etc.
predisposes political elites towards looking out for certain people's
interests rather than others, leading to ethnic violence. Varshney's
argument tells us that the processes that stop ethnic violence are
actually local and deal with structure of civic life.

Used Process tracing to trace backwards from the outcome, establishing
each step of a causal mechanism. Brief summary:

-   1990-1993: District administration caught murderers of religious
    holy men and harrassers of religious places quickly in Lucknow, but
    in Hyderabad, they failed, and politicians wove these events into
    speeches. Typically the offender was actually from the same
    religious group as had been attacked, but in Hyderabad, the
    narrative spun said they were not. In Lucknow, "peace committees"
    were formed out of pre-existing local networks. In Hyderabad, "peace
    committee" were ineffective.

**Endogeneity:** How can we be sure that communal violence did not
destroy Hindu-Muslim civic networks in riot prone-towns?

-   City of Surat in Pair 3 helps explain: When a riot destroyed mosque,
    the first episode of ethnic violence in 70 years, shantytowns where
    workers had long hours and no time to build interethnic ties saw
    much ethnic violence, but areas of the city with strong interethnic
    ties saw only no violence because they could deploy human resources
    to calm down situations, kill rumors, etc.

**History:** Had interethnic civic networks always been robust in
peaceful towns, or can we build them from scratch? Varshney argues that
civic networks (Associational and everyday/quotidian) are effective in
short-medium term, but intercommunal, associational networks required
for long-term peace. Foundations of India's associational civic order
laid by Gandhian shift in 1920s-1940s. Prior to that, British had
separated India into highly elitist, classist categories. This suggests
that we *can* build interethnic networks. But, this early movement built
stronger associational movements in areas where a Hindu-Muslim cleavage
had not yet emerged in local politics. If local politics emphasized a
different cleavage, eg. caste cleaves or Sunni-Shia, then it was easier
to build associational ties.

-   Tim note: So, building social integration seems to be an exponential
    project; the more you do it in the past, the easier it is to do it
    in the future.

**Research Materials**

-   National Level: Large n analysis of Hindu-Muslimriots based n Times
    of India daily newspaper 1950-1995. (Descriptive?)

-   City Level: interviews at elite level (25-30) and cross-section
    levels (stratified sample of 100 households) conducted for each city
    case. 700 cross-section interviews & 130 elite interviews.

**Organization:**

-   Chapter 2: Lit review: why doesn't existing literature explain
    ethnic violence? Focus on essentialism, instrumentalism,
    constructivism, and institutionalism. None work at the intranational
    level.

-   Chapters 3-4 summarize national trends; Chapters 5-11 present 6 city
    casse studies. Chapter 12 concludes.

**Chapter 2 Brief Summary:**

-   Ethnic violence is highly locally/regionally concentrated in
    *general* - in US, Ireland, India, etc. So why doesn't essentialism,
    instrumentalism, constructivism, or institutionalism explain ethnic
    violence?

-   **Essentialism vs. Instrumentalism**

    -   Explains *why ethnic conflict occurs at all,* not why when or
        where

    -   Intrinsic ethnic differences vs. instrumental value of those
        ethnic differences

    -   Essentialism: can trace ethnic conflicts back to older
        animosities between groups.

        -   If animosities are so historically deep, why does violence
            vary throughout time and space?

        -   How does nationality, ethnicity, religion, etc. affect this?

    -   Instrumentalism: ethnic identity is manipulated for political
        and economic purposes by elites.

        -   Why do leaders decide to mobilize ethnic passions in the
            first place? Why do they think that ethnicity, not economic
            interests, is the route to power?

    -   Also, ethnic mobilization for political action is not the same
        as ethnic coordination for economic social activities.

    -   Leaves too much unexplained.

-   **Constructivism vs. Institutionalism**

    -   Explains why *some ethnic cleaves* become master cleavages,
        acquiring staying power, bitterness, and violence.

    -   Constructivism: our specific ethnic groups are a modern social
        construction of the times.

    -   Postmodern Constructivists: the power elite created some
        categories, not others; that's why people have been pushed into
        categories.

    -   Unpostmodern Constructivists: Benedict Anderson would argue that
        these master narratives arise not just because of elites but
        also because of the public posing challenges to the existing
        elite through nationalism. The public can also weave imagined
        communities.

    -   How do these arguments really differ from essentialism and
        instrumentalism? To call ethnic identities just masks it to
        undervalue their endurance and not understand their historical
        basis. Identities do not always change, even if interests do.
        Ergo, not great at explainity regional or loca lvariance.

    -   Institutionalism: institutions create rules for political
        contestation, but also generate predispositions to outcomes,
        give the number and size of ethnic groups. Certain systems, like
        single member districts, predispose an ethnic group to
        dominating representation. But if a given state's localities
        share the same institutional architecture, it won't explain
        variation in outcomes.

<!-- -->

-   Civil Society - the explanation:

    -   Independent of state

    -   Exists between family and state

    -   Makes connections between individuals and families possible

    -   Composed of voluntary participation in associations (not
        ethnicity or religion)

    -   Nonassociational space can also be a kind of civil society;
        informal but group-based acitivity can be included; hard to draw
        lines.

    -   Taking pride in one's ethnic group does not make on uncivil. But
        causing harm to othes, specifically targeting them, does.

-   Types of Engagement and Ethnic Conflict

    -   *From below:* Peace committees emerge from below in a community

    -   *From above:* Peace committees are appointed by officials

    -   Civic engagement shrinks the effectiveness of inraethnic
        engagement by making Interethnic engagement possible.

    -   "Associations can more easily counter the depredations of
        politcally protected ganges than everyday neighborhood
        engagement" (50). As the number of people in a city increases,
        the number of connections between them necessary to counter
        violence increases A LOT. As a result, we need associations in
        cities.

    -   
