# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Institutions and Ethnic Politics in Africa
author(s): Daniel #Posner
year: #y2005 
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Institutions #Ethnicity #Africa 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary


Posner, Daniel. 2005. *Institutions and Ethnic Politics in Africa*. New
York: Cambridge University Press. Chapter 5.

*Most of this is directly from the text*

**Chapter 5: Explaining Changing Patterns of Ethnic Politics**

Posner examines the possible reasonings behind changing ethnic patterns
within Zambian voter blocks utilizing the switch from a multi-party
system to a single party system as their case study. Clearly, something
about the incentives generated by the one-party or multi-party nature of
the country's political institutions had led to different kinds of
ethnic identity choices. But what was the link? Why did Zambian
politicians and voters focus on language group differences during
multi-party elections and tribal differences during one-party contests?
How was the institutional change causing the change in identity choices?
This chapter suggests a mechanism.

First, Posner introduces a simple model of ethnic identity choice. This
general model shows how, given a set of assumptions, you can predict the
identities that individuals will choose and thus the cleavage dimension
that will emerge as the axis of competition and conflict in the
political system. Then Posner shows how changing the boundaries of the
arena in which political competition takes place can change the outcome
that emerges. Next, he shows how shifting from multi-party to one-party
rule brings about a de facto alteration in the boundaries of the
political arena and, with it, a change in both the choices individuals
will make and, through those choices, the ethnic cleavage that will
emerge as salient. He then applies the model to the Zambian case. The
chapter concludes by revisiting some of the model's key assumptions to
assess its portability to other settings.

Creates and Ethnic Identity Matrix ﻿to help clarify why individuals make
the identity choices that they do.

**Key Takeaways:**

-   ﻿Traditional accounts of ethnic politics approach such questions by
    assuming that individuals will select the identity to which they
    have the deepest emotional commitment.

-   ﻿This book takes an entirely different approach. Rather than assume
    that one identity is somehow innately stronger than another, I
    assume that all of the identities in a person\'s repertoire are
    equally important components of who they understand themselves to
    be.

-   ﻿Instead, I argue that the choice is made purely instrumentally - for
    what the person gets for choosing one identity over the other, not
    for what it means for them to choose it.

-   ﻿I argue that people will make their choice by weighing which
    identity will secure them access to the greatest share of political
    and economic resources and that this, in turn, will lead them to
    choose the identity that puts them in the group that, by virtue of
    its size vis-a-vis other groups, puts them in a minimum winning
    political coalition.

-   ﻿The critical point is that race emerges as the central axis of
    social identification and political division in this example not
    because racial identities are inherently or historically stronger
    than linguistic identities and not because politicians playing the
    race card are somehow more skillful than those attempting to
    mobilize the population along linguistic lines. Race emerges as
    politically salient because of the relative sizes of the
    community\'s racial and linguistic groups

-   ﻿Changes in the boundaries of the political arena generated changes
    in the dimensions of ethnic identity that were mobilized.

-   ﻿A shift from multi-party to one-party competition will shrink that
    arena from the nation as a whole to the level of the electoral
    constituency, and a shift from one-party to multi-party competition
    will expand it from the electoral constituency to the nation as a
    whole. These changes, in turn, affect the kinds of ethnic cleavages
    that will emerge as axes of political competition and conflict in
    each context.

-   ﻿In one-party settings, political conflict will revolve around
    constituency-level ethnic cleavages. In multi-party elections, where
    the arena of political competition is the entire country, broader
    cleavages that define national-scale groups will become salient. In
    both settings, politicians will seek to build, and voters will cast
    their votes so as to secure membership in minimum winning
    coalitions. But because the arenas of competition are different, the
    social material out of which these coalitions will be crafted will
    be different as well. In one-party settings, political competition
    and conflict will revolve around the ethnic groups that divide the
    constituency; in multi-party settings, it will revolve around the
    ethnic groups that divide the nation.
