# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Modernization, Ethnic Competition, and the Rationality of Politics in Contemporary Africa 
author(s): Robert #Bates 
year: #y1983
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Modernization #Violence #Ethnicity #Rational_Choice  
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

Robert H. Bates: Modernization, Ethnic Competition, and the Rationality
of Politics in Contemporary Africa (1983):

Despite the predictions of modernization theory, sociological, and
Marxist theories, ethnic competition and conflict persists, including in
modern nation-states. Why is this?

Argument: "Ethnic groups represent coalitions which have been formed as
part of rational efforts to secure benefits created by the forces of
modernization -- benefits which are desired but scarce."

[Definitions]{.underline}:

Modernity: A society is more modern if it has achieved higher levels of:
education, per capita income, urbanization, political participation,
industrial employment, and media participation. (Bates will focus on the
first 3 variables when he refers to "modernity")

Ethnic competition: "Striving by ethnic groups, for valued goods which
are scarce in comparison to the demand for them."

Ethnic groups: organized groups of people with a set of common
activities and interests. They distinguish themselves from other types
of groups by the symbols they use: collective origin myths, assertion of
ties of kinship or blood (real or not), mythology expressive of cultural
uniqueness (and possibly superiority), and conscious elaboration of
language and heritage. They also include people from every stage of life
and socioeconomic level.

Ethnic groups should also be distinguished from tribal groups -- they
need not be linked by traditional political obligations or institutions.

[The Argument and Evidence for its Plausibility]{.underline}:

Modernity = cluster of desired goods. These goods are desired, and thus
competed for. Competition is illustrated by struggles over forms of
income: land, markets, and jobs.

Land: The penetration of a money economy leads to intense competition
for land. People adapted to change to money economy by trying to secure
long-term land rights. Major conflicts also occur between indigenous
ethnic groups alienated from their lands, and the immigrant groups who
benefits from the competition of real estate.

Markets: The control of trading routes and access to them is equally as
intense of a conflict as land.

Jobs: Another frequent source of conflict -- also exacerbated by the
expansion of the production of educated employables at a rate that
exceeds the expansion of job opportunities.

Modernity and Stratification: Modernization leads to competition which
leads to scarcity which leads to stratification. Those who claim to be
more 'modern' can claim a higher social rank. Modern occupations are
also ranked higher than traditional occupations. The prestige of an
occupation can be indicated by: the degree of responsibility, service
value, income, education, and nature of working conditions.

Stratification and Competition: In the emergence of ethnic competition
is that societies as well as individuals are judged along modernity
dimensions. Groups that are wealthier, better-educated, and more
urbanized tend to be envied, resented, and sometimes feared by others --
basis is the recognition of superior placement in new, stratified
system. This can be seen in Nigeria and Kenya.

[Basis for the Formation of Ethnic Groups]{.underline}:

Basic question: Why should the competition for the components of
modernity and for status positions as defined by modernity involve
ethnic groups? Three answers:

1.  Distribution of modernity and ethnic groups tends to be governed by
    the factor of space. Where modernization takes place often
    determines who gets modernized.

2.  Administrative and ethnic areas often coincide.

3.  It is often useful for those engaged in the competition for
    modernity to generate and mobilize the support of ethnic groupings.

Factor of Space: Think of a network -- modernity originates in nodes and
diffuses into other areas. Modernity also slopes downward with distance
-- with central places being most modernized, the proximate areas being
less so, and the hinterlands lagging further behind. Ethnic groups tend
to cluster in space -- colonial polices often assigned ethnic groups to
stable and rigidly defined spaces. One result of this spatial ordering
is that members of ethnic groups will tend to have preferences with
respect to allocational decisions which are homogenous and well defined.
Insofar as a group occupies a specific area, then, its members would
have a uniform preference with respect to sites; they would prefer that
resources be devoted to projects in or near their area and not further
away. Many ethnic conflicts take the form of location disputes. Another
result of spatial orderings is that some groups get advantaged in terms
of their attainment.

Space, Administration, and the Incentive to Organize: Local
administration is a primary agent in modernization -- for colonial
power, by delineating administrative boundaries along tribal lines, they
made in the interests of their subject to organize ethnic groups to gain
control over admin mechanisms. This can be seen in case studies of land
policy in Africa. Power of local admin also extends into control of
markets, regulations, construction, etc. Improvements happen at the
behest of those with the most stake in modern economies. Local
administration has the power of distribution of modernity. Demands for
local administration of districts and council allows for securing
distribution but also for exclusion.

The Behavior of the Moderns: It is in the benefit of the most modern
elements to sponsor growth of traditional consciousness in Africa. It is
often those who are better-off by their occupations in the modern sector
who form ethnic unions.

Social and Economic Competition and the Formation of Groups: The members
of an advantaged ethnic groups are motivated to defend their leading
position; they devise methods for retaining their privileged positions,
such as biasing local council legislation. Less favored members of a
privileged ethnic group place immense pressure on their more advantaged
brothers to share benefits derived from their advanced positions --
under the pressure of the less advantaged, a sense of obligation
resembling that usually extended to immediate kin is thus broadened to
include fellow village dwellers and even those from other
villages/districts. The social-climbing of less advantaged creates
mythology of consanguinity in search of modern benefits -- initially
advantaged groups consolidates and comes to view itself as an ethnic
group in the process. A major result is the creation of a sense of
threat and disadvantage among other groups.

Political Competition: Similar pattern in politics -- competition over
control of distribution of modernity. Main reason for these conflicts is
that in the competition for power, ethnic appeals are useful to
politicians.

The Persistence of Ethnic Groups: Ethnic groups persist largely because
of their capacity to extract goods and services from the modern sector
and thereby satisfy the demands of their members. Insofar as they
provide these benefits to their members, they are able to gain their
support and achieve their loyalty. The capacity of ethnic groups to
extract benefits from the modern sector is best demonstrated in their
relationship with those who have achieved positions of prominence in
that sector. Ethnic groups exert powerful social pressures upon the
modern elite in order to satisfy the demands of their members. The
acceptance of traditional stratification patterns leads many moderns to
convert their success in the modern sector into prestige in the
traditional order by utilizing their wealth to obtain prestigious
positions in their ethnic groupings.

Ethnic groups are able to extract investments from persons seeking
access to elite positions in a modern order. The moderns need and seek
the support of ethnic groupings. Forces thus promote the supply and
demand of services between the ethnic groupings and the most progressive
elements of modernizing societies.

[Conclusion]{.underline}

The rationality of ethnic behavior has eluded the modernization,
sociological, and Marxist theorists because they failed to perceive the
usefulness of the ethnic organization.

Ethnic organization is a means of organizing to attain the benefits of
modernization -- is a form of coalition-building in the pursuit of
modern goods.

Political systems allocation resources by making decisions. There is a
tension between expanding the coalition yet excluding in order to retain
benefits to yourself.

Bates argues that a consequence of the considerations of spatial
allocation, institutions, and language uniformity is that actors who
rationally seeks benefits will organize competitive groupings that take
the form of ethnic groups.

Ethnic groups = the minimum winning coalition large enough to secure
benefits in the competition for spoils but also small enough to maximize
the per capita value of these benefits.

Ethnic conflict will not go away with modernization, nor decline as
education increases. Institutional design is what needs to change to
alter the incentives of coalition-building and collective action.
