# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Nationalism and Ethnic-Based Trust: Evidence From an African Border Region
author(s): Amanda Lea #Robinson
year: #y2016
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Nationalism #Ethnicity #Trust
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary


**Nationalism and Ethnic-Based Trust: Evidence From an African Border
Region**

**Amanda Lea Robinson (2016)**

**Summary**

By surveying and conducting "lab in the field experiment, named economic
trust game" on 4 types of citizens (Combination of 2 ethnic groups and 2
nationalities: 1. Malawian Chewa 2. Malawian Tumbuka 3. Zambian Chewa 4.
Zambian Tumbuka), Robinson found that identification with a
territorially defined nation, common to all ethnic groups, reduces the
degree to which trust is ethnically bounded. Among weak national
identifiers, coethnics are trusted at a higher rate than non-coethnics,
but among strong national identifiers, this coethnic trust premium all
but disappears.

**Economic trust game**

After completing the short survey, each respondent played the first
round of a trust game 4 times (each time with a different "type" of
partner: a conational coethnic, a conational non-coethnic, a
non-conational coethnic, and a non-conational non-coethnic) with four
anonymous partners. The trust game is a two-player behavioral economic
game in which a Trustor is given a sum of money and asked to decide how
much money to send to a Trustee. Any money transferred from the Trustor
to the Trustee is tripled by the experimenter, and the Trustee then
decides how much of the tripled money to return to the Trustor. The
amount of money transferred from the Trustor to the Trustee in the first
round is interpreted as the degree of trust that the Trustor holds in
the Trustee and is the focus of all analyses here. For each trust
decision, the participant was given an endowment of 60 MWK in the form
of three 20 MWK bills. For each trust game, the participant decided
privately how much of that endowment to entrust to their anonymous
partner about whom they only knew village of residence. Across all trust
decisions, the average amount entrusted was 30 MWK. Nothing was
entrusted in 12% of decisions, whereas 20, 40, and 60 MWK were entrusted
in 42%, 27%, and 19%.

**Experimental Manipulation of national identity salience**

The survey included two extra questions about the Malawian national
flag. In July 2010, the Malawian national flag was officially changed.
Research assistants displayed large images of each flag in front of the
participant and explained the symbolism of each flag (they are very
similar in meaning) and then asked the respondent which flag they
thought best represented the Malawian nation. Although the respondents'
actual preferences were not of particular interest, simply asking
respondents to consider the historical symbolism of the flags served to
increase the salience of their Malawian national identity. The flags
were left on the table after the completion of the survey and remained
there for the duration of trust decisions.

My thought

1)  If token reminding ethnicity are given instead of national flag
    result may change?

2)  Strong national identification seem ameliorate ethnic divide-low
    social trust for interethnic relation. However, strong-moderate
    national identification may create another cleavage substituting for
    ethnic division? This paper did not argue.
