# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: The Political Salience of Cultural Difference: Why Chewas and Tumbukas are Allies in Zambia and Adversaries in Malawi
author(s): Daniel N. #Posner
year: #y2004
citation: Daniel N. Posner, The Political Salience of Cultural Difference: Why Chewas and Tumbukas are Allies in Zambia and Adversaries in Malawi (November 2004)
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Ethnicity #Culture #Violence #Elections #Rational_Choice 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

Daniel N. Posner: The Political Salience of Cultural Difference: Why
Chewas and Tumbukas are Allies in Zambia and Adversaries in Malawi
(November 2004):

Puzzle/Question: Why do some cultural differences matter for politics
and others not? When do cultural cleavages become politically salient
and when are they politically irrelevant?

Argument: Political salience of a cultural cleavage will depend on the
sizes of the groups that it defines relative to the size of the arena in
which political competition is taking place.

-   If the cultural cleavage defines groups that are large enough to
    constitute viable conditions in the competition for political power,
    then politicians will mobilize these groups and the cleavage that
    divides them will become politically salient.

-   If the cultural cleavage defines groups that are too small to serve
    as viable bases of political support, then these groups will go
    un-mobilized and the cleavage that separates them will remain
    politically irrelevant.

**A Natural Experiment**

Posner uses a natural experiment -- drawing upon the cultural
differences between the Chewa and Tumbuka people that live on the
Zambia-Malawi border (the boundary was demarcated by the British in 1891
to distinguish NE and NW Rhodesia), a purely administrative border.

In Malawi -- the interactions are often antagonistic where the groups
see each other as political adversaries (though it's never led to
outright violence).

In Zambia -- the groups view each other as ethnic brethren and political
allies -- overwhelmingly supporting the same party since independence.

**Chewa-Tumbuka Relations in Zambia and Malawi**

Data gathering occurred in July and August 2001 -- a questionnaire was
issued in four villages: 2 Chewa (Mkanda, Zambia and Mkanda, Malawi) and
2 Tumbuka (Mwase-Lundazi, Zambia and Kapopo, Malawi) -- each village was
located directly across the border from each other (see figure 1 below
on p 532)

Two Criteria for selecting villages: (1) homogeneity of the village
Chewa and Tumbuka populations, (2) similarity across each Chewa and
Tumbuka village pair to rule out competing explanations (village
welfare, agricultural production, etc.). Villages were also selected
based on equal exposer to national political affairs in respective
countries (distance to roads, distance to nearest Chewa or Tumbuka
village).

42 respondents interviewed in each of the two Zambian villages, and 48
respondents in each of the two Malawian villages -- total sample of 180
using random stratified quota sampling procedure for every third
unrelated household.

Five survey questions were used (see p 533) and focus groups were also
used to get further contextual information on the villages and
surroundings.

**The Differing Salience of an Identical Cultural Cleavage**

83% of interviewees were able to identify at least one attribute,
tradition, or custom (and often several) that made Chewas and Tumbukas
different. Average of 1.36 differences spotted -- 23% of Zambian and 15%
of Malwian respondents mentioned no differences. For those that did ID a
difference, it was 1.66 for Zambians and 1.7 for Malawians.

Malawians also added negative statements about members of the other
community in addition to identifying differences.

See figure 2 below for Zambian and Malawian differences in answering
questions


Posner then uses logit regressions to control for respondents' tribal
affiliations, gender, age the number of cultural differences mentioned.
See table 1 below.


Number of differences variable is insignificant which means that the
perceived degree of cultural difference between the two communities has
no effect ton respondents' attitudes toward members of the other group.

In both countries Tumbuka respondents demonstrate more hostility to
Chewa than vice versa -- particularly when it comes to inter-marriage.
Women are significantly less willing to marry outside their group than
men.

Most important finding: controlling for all other factors, the most
powerful determinant of a respondent's attitudes toward members of the
other community is his or her physical location on one side of the
Zambia-Malawi border. Malawian respondents are significantly less
willing to vote for a presidential candidate form the other group and
significantly less willing to marry.

**Why Chewas and Tumbukas are Allies in Zambia and Adversaries in
Malawi**

Modernization explanations can be ruled out since there are no
discernable differences in development among respondents in each
country.

Political institution effects can also be ruled out since both Zambia
and Malawi have identical single-member plurality electoral rules and
very similar (and highly-centralized) candidate selection procedures.
The countries have parallel histories of alternating one-party and
multiparty governance since independence. Both countries also have very
little unitary political power.

Timing of the questionnaires may have caught countries at different
points in elective cycles -- but if anything, this would have heightened
the salience of group divisions in Zambia rather than Malawi. At the
time of the survey, Zambia was preparing for an election 4 months later,
and Malawi did not have an election until 2004.

Colonial history is also an unlikely explanation because the missionary
societies (Tumbukas are associated with the Livingstonia Mission, Chewas
with the White Fathers French Catholic group) that settled among the
Tumbukas and Chewas set up camp on both sides of the border.

A socially constructivist explanation cannot be entirely ruled out --
but it does not account for differences over the border.

Final explanation is that ethnic relations per se (not just those
between Chewas and Tumbukas) are simply more conflictual in Malawi than
in Zambia. There is evidence for this hypothesis. Zambia was ruled by
Kenneth Kaunda (1964-1991) who championed non-racialism, while Malawi
was ruled by Kamuzu Banda (1964-1994) who championed his own Chewa
culture. But in order to explain the differing salience of the
Chewa-Tumbuka cleavage in Zambia and Malawi, one must account for why
Banda and Kaunda chose to exploit the particular axes of cultural
division that they did.

**Group Size and Cleavage Salience**

Differences in nation size and percentage of population -- in Malawi,
28% of population is Chewa, and 12% is Tumbuka. While in Zambia it is 7%
and 4% respectively. See figure 3 below on p 538.


In Malawi, both populations are sufficiently large enough to constitute
viable political coalition in competition for national power -- thus
politicians seek the support of Chewa and Tumbuka groups.

This is not the case in Zambia where population percentages are low,
groups go un-mobilized, and cultural differences remain politically
inconsequential. When the ethnic card is played in Zambia, they do not
choose to emphasize the cleavage between the two groups.

Politicians are not the only ones attuned to the logic of ethnic
arithmetic. Just as politicians seek to build coalitions of viable
sizes, voters also seek to gain entry into coalitions that will permit
one of their own to win political power.

Ethnic differences in Zambia are not only less politically salient, but
less socially salient (see table 2 below on p 540)

**The Power of Administrative Boundaries**

An additional potentially relevant factors is the correspondence in
Malawi of the Chewa-Tumbuka cleavage with the administrative boundary
between Malawi's Northern and Central regions. For many Malawians the
labels Tumbuka and Northern, or Chewa and Central Region mean the same
thing.

The Chewa and Tumbuka are also separated by an administrative border in
Zambia.

Posner collected additional data from a 3^rd^ Malawian group that
straddle the administrative border. 30 randomly selected respondents
from Nkhata Bay (see figure 4 below on p 542) with 2 questions about:
one about voting and the other about marrying.

The survey was designed for people to have to choose between regional
and tribal identities. A Nkhata Bay vote for Rumphi indicates regional
vote, and Nkhata Bay vote for Liwaladzi indicates tribal vote. The
purely cultural expectation would be a tribal (Liwaladzi) vote, but
nearly half (46%) expressed favor for Northern candidate instead of a
tribal candidate, and more than a third (38%) expressed marriage
preference for same region, but different tribe.

The sample size of the study is too small to be more than suggestive,
but it does suggest that cultural material is not as important as we
think.

**Conclusion**

Key findings: Some cultural cleavages matter a lot more for political
competition and social categorization, and others do not. Innate
cultural differences do not necessarily have great power than
noncultural differences to generate political or social division.

The findings suggest that cultural differences are neither sufficient
nor necessary for the emergence of political or social divisions.

A lack of cultural "authenticity" need not imply that a political
boundary is any less politically or socially meaningful than one based
on cultural difference. The impact of Africa's colonial era boundary
drawing (as well as the impact of redrawing those boundaries) may lie as
much within states as at their borders.

Political entrepreneurs are important, but they need to be attuned to
the cultural demography they have to work with -- and the demography
creates incentives for mobilizing the different cleavages in different
contexts.
