# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Trade, Institutions, and Ethnic Tolerance: Evidence from South Asia
author(s): #Jha
year: #y2013
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Trade #Institutions #Ethnicity #Southeast_Asia 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

**Trade, Institutions, and Ethnic Tolerance: Evidence from South Asia,
Jha (2013)**

Warning! This was the most complicated paper I read in terms of number
of statistical models like DID and assumptions. I cannot keep track of
details but provide overview.

**Puzzle**

How and why ethnic, religious minority group become targeted to ethnic
violence? Previous studies show that existence of minority group may
result in both peaceful cooperation and ethnic violence. Evidence for
violence: Ethnic Chinese in Indonesia to South Asians in East Africa to
Jews in Europe, historical and contemporary examples abound of even the
most commercially oriented minority groups becoming repeated targets of
ethnic violence and expropriation (806). Hindu-Muslim interaction in
South Asia. Hindus and Muslims have engaged in 13 centuries of economic,
political and, violent interaction. Evidence for peaceful cooperation:
However, within these Indian cities, medieval ports, despite being more
ethnically mixed, were five times less prone to Hindu-Muslim riots
between 1850 and 1950 in comparison with other Indian cities. He argues
that historical legacy of ethnic cooperation, medieval trade legacy
between Muslim and Hindu still reduces the likelihood of violence in
recent years.

**Explanation: Institutionalization of Peace**

In fact, a medieval trade legacy appears to reduce violence the most in
larger towns that are more ethnically mixed, consistent with a
beneficial effect for peaceful coexistence when members of a greater
minority population compete with one another in providing

complementary services. The effects also do not appear to come purely
from differential human capital (Glaeser et al. 2004)---as measured by
the presence of medieval skilled crafts production in a town. In fact,
in ***non-portmedieval towns,*** where skilled artisans were more likely
to compete across ethnic lines for patronage, the presence of such
skills actually left a legacy of greater violence. In contrast, in
***medieval ports***, where skilled artisans had greater incentives to
maintain interethnic complementarity in the production of these crafts,
the reductions in future violence are greater in those that enjoyed such
skills. Thus, institutions and human capital appear to be themselves
complements. Muslims enjoyed nonreplicable non-expropriable
complementarities rather than medieval land-based trade where Hindus
could locally replicate Muslim trading networks or modern trade where European intervention eroded Muslims overseas advantages.

