# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Elections Without Democracy: The Rise of Competitive Authoritarianism
author(s): Steven #Levitsky and Lucan A. #Way
year: #y2002
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Hybrid #Democracy #REGIMES #Non-Democracy 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary




Steven Levitsky and Lucan A. Way: Elections Without Democracy: The Rise
of Competitive Authoritarianism (2002):

Post-Cold War has been marked by hybrid political regimes (democratic
rules combined w/authoritarian governance) with many labels in the
literature, but the literature suffers from 2 weaknesses. (1) Studies
are biased towards democratization (scholars assume these regimes are
slowly moving toward democracy). (2) Terms like "semidemocratic" or
"semi-authoritarian" use residual categories and gloss over important
differences. Different mixes of authoritarian and democratic features
have distinct historical roots and different implications for the
economy, human rights, and the prospects of democracy.

**Defining Competitive Authoritarianism**: "Formal democratic
institutions are widely viewed as the principal means of obtaining and
exercising political authority." Incumbents frequently violate those
rules and the regime fails to meet the standards of democracy. (Think
Russia under Puti, Serbia under Milosevic, or Peru under Fujimori).

Democracies have four minimum criteria: (1) free and fair elections, (2)
universal suffrage, (3) political rights and civil liberties, e.g., free
speech, press, etc., and (4) elected authorities possess real authority
and aren't' controlled by military or clerical powers. In competitive
authoritarian regimes, violations are frequent -- creating uneven
playing field.

Not the same as weak "delegative democracies" -- where there is low
accountability, and executives can be abusive but still meet the 4
minimum standards above.

Not the same as true authoritarianism either -- Incumbents don't openly
violate rules, but use bribery, co-optation, subtle persecution,
harassment, etc. Incumbents still must take the institutions seriously.

**Four Arenas of Democratic Contestation:** In competitive authoritarian
regimes, democratic institutions persist, and opposition can
occasionally challenge the incumbents in four different arenas:

-   **Electoral Arena:** Elections are taken seriously, but bitterly
    fought, and characterized by abuses of state power.

    -   Rule of thumb: reelection by more than 70% of vote or up is
        noncompetitive

-   **Legislative Arena:** In full authoritarian regimes, legislatures
    do not exist or thoroughly controlled by ruling party -- in
    competitive authoritarian regimes, legislatures tend to be weak but
    occasionally become focal point of conflict.

-   **Judicial Arena:** Competitive authoritarian governments routinely
    subordinate the judiciary through bribes, impeachment, etc. However,
    maverick judges occasionally have an opening for conflict (e.g.,
    court in Ukraine stipulated that Kuchma's referendum to reduce
    legislative powers was nonbinding). Ruling by opposition may result
    in subsequent punishment.

-   **The Media:** Often the central point of conflict. In authoritarian
    regimes, the media is almost entirely state-owned. In competitive
    authoritarian regimes, independent journalism exists and can be
    influential -- though journalists are frequently threatened and
    suppressed through subtle mechanisms (bribery, state advertising,
    tax/debt manipulation, etc.)

**Inherent Tensions:** Coexistence of democratic rules and autocratic
methods by incumbents creates an inherent source of instability.
Democratic challenges are dilemmas for incumbents. Periods of serious
democratic contestation result in bringing out contradictions inherent
in competitive authoritarian regimes -- resulting in regimes crises
(e.g., Mexico in '88, Russia in '93, Albania in '97).

Succession **is not** democratization. Incumbent turnover can result in
democratic transitions, but in many cases the new elected leaders
continue or intensify the authoritarian practices. Removing autocratic
incumbents creates the opportunity for regime change, but does not
ensure the outcome. Proximity/linkages to the west may play a role in
trajectory of change of competitive authoritarian regimes in the 1990s.

**Paths to Competitive Authoritarianism:** Three paths of emergence in
1990s: (1) democracy of a full-blown authoritarian regimes (e.g.,
sub-Saharan Africa), (2) collapse of an authoritarian regime (Russia,
Serbia, Ukraine), or (3) decay of democratic regime (Peru & Venezuela).

Roots of recent proliferation suggest the difficult of consolidating
both democratic and authoritarian regimes.

**Conceptualizing Non-democracies**: Scholars need to move past a
"transition paradigm." Early hopes for democratization in much of the
world was overly optimistic. Some forms of authoritarianism have become
more difficult to sustain, but nondemocratic regimes have taken on
greater importance.
