
# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: THE RISE OF COMPETITIVE AUTHORITARIANISM
author(s): Steven #Levitsky, Lucan A. #Way
year: #y2002
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Non-Democracy #Hybrid #REGIMES 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary


### First Summary

**THE RISE OF COMPETITIVE AUTHORITARIANISM**

**Steven Levitsky, Lucan A. Way 2002**

**Main Argument**

Western liberal hegemony, global economic change, developments in media
and communications technologies, and the growth of international
networks aimed at promoting democracy and human rights all have
contributed to reshaping the opportunities and constraints facing
authoritarian elites. As a result, some forms of authoritarianism, such
as totalitarianism and bureaucratic authoritarianism, have become more
difficult to sustain. At the same time, however, several new (or
partially new) nondemocratic regime types took on greater importance in
the 1990s, including competitive authoritarian. Thomas Carothers' call
to move beyond what he calls the "transition paradigm." Democratization
in much of the world were overly optimistic. The collapse of one kind of
authoritarianism yielded not democracy but a new form of nondemocratic
rule. Remarkably little research has been undertaken on the emergence or
persistence of nondemocratic regimes.

**Introduction**

The post-Cold War world has been marked by the proliferation of hybrid
political regimes. In different ways, and to varying degrees, polities
across much of Africa (Ghana, Kenya, Mozambique, Zambia, Zimbabwe),
post-communist Eurasia (Albania, Croatia, Russia, Serbia, Ukraine), Asia
(Malaysia, Taiwan), and Latin America (Haiti, Mexico, Paraguay,

Peru) combined democratic rules with authoritarian governance during the
1990s. Scholar often treated these regimes as incomplete or transitional
forms of democracy (Too Optimistic!). Scholars categorized polity like
virtual democracy, electoral democracy- these are assuming that all
polity eventually transit to democracy. Hence, although each of these
cases could be categorized as "hybrid, "semidemocratic," or "partly
free," such labels obscure crucial differences---differences that may
have important causal implications. Different mixes of authoritarian and
democratic features have distinct historical roots, and they may have
different implications for economic performance, human rights, and the
prospects for democracy.

**Defining Competitive Authoritarianism**

In competitive authoritarian regimes, although elections are regularly
held and are generally free of massive fraud, incumbents routinely abuse
state resources, deny the opposition adequate media coverage, harass
opposition candidates and their supporters, and in some cases manipulate
electoral results. Yet if competitive authoritarian regimes fall short
of democracy, they also fall short of full-scale authoritarianism.
Although incumbents in competitive authoritarian regimes may routinely
manipulate formal democratic rules, they are unable to eliminate them or
reduce them to a mere facade. Rather than openly violating democratic
rules (for example, by banning or repressing the opposition and the
media), incumbents are more likely to use bribery, co-optation, and more
subtle forms of persecution, such as the use of tax authorities. the
persistence of meaningful democratic institutions creates arenas through
which opposition forces may---and frequently do---pose significant
challenges. As a result, even though democratic institutions may be
badly flawed, both authoritarian incumbents and their opponents must
take them seriously.

**Four Arenas of Democratic Contestation**

Due to the persistence of meaningful democratic institutions in
competitive authoritarian regimes, arenas of contestation exist through
which opposition forces may periodically challenge, weaken, and
occasionally even defeat autocratic incumbents. Four such arenas are of
particular importance: 1) the electoral arena; 2) the legislature; 3)
the judiciary; and 4) the media.

**Inherent Tensions**

Periods of serious democratic contestation thus bring out the
contradictions inherent

in competitive authoritarianism, forcing autocratic incumbents to choose
between egregiously violating democratic rules, at the cost of
international isolation and domestic conflict, and allowing the
challenge to proceed, at the cost of possible defeat.

Although in many cases (Croatia, Nicaragua, Peru, Slovakia, Serbia)
incumbent turnover resulted in democratic transitions, in other cases,
including Albania, Zambia, Ukraine, and Belarus, newly elected leaders
continued or even intensified many of the authoritarian practices of
their predecessors. Hence, while the removal of autocratic elites
creates an important opportunity for regime change and even
democratization, it does not ensure it. Although it is beyond the scope
of this article to explain variations in the capacity of competitive
authoritarian regimes to survive crises brought about by episodes of
democratic contestation, one pattern is worth noting.15 In regions with
closer ties to the West, particularly Latin America and Central Europe,
the removal of autocratic incumbents has generally resulted in
democratization in the post--Cold War period. By contrast, the record of
competitive authoritarian regimes in Africa and the former Soviet Union
is strikingly different. Among former Soviet republics, only one
competitive authoritarian regime (Moldova) democratized in the 1990s.

**Paths to Competitive Authoritarianism**

1)  Decay of Full Authoritarianism\--Sub-Saharan Africa

2)  Collapse of Full Authoritarianism\--Armenia, Croatia, Romania,
    Russia, Serbia, and Ukraine, as well as by Haiti

3)  Decay of Democracy-Peru in the early 1990s and perhaps contemporary
    Venezuela.


### Second Summary

Competitive Authoritarianism: Hybrid Regimes after the Cold War (2010).

Steven Levitsky (Harvard) and Lucan A Way (UToronto)

This summary goes over Chapters 1 and 2, you then pick one from Chapters
5-7 to read for yourself.

Chapter 1: Introduction

-   Transitions from communist states did not always lead to democracy
    but what the authors term as competitive authoritarianism: Electoral
    manipulation, unfair media access, abuse of state resources, and
    varying degrees of harassment and violence skewed the playing field
    in favor of incumbents. In other words, competition was real but
    unfair

-   33 regimes were competitive authoritarian in 1995 -- a figure that
    exceeded the number of full democracies in the developing and
    post-communist world

-   This book examines the trajectories of all 35 regimes that were or
    became competitive authoritarian between 1990 and 1995

-   Research Question: Why did some competitive authoritarian regimes
    democratized during the post--Cold War period, while others remained
    stable and authoritarian and still others experienced turnover
    without democratization?

-   IV: Linkage to west, strength of governing party and state
    organizations

-   DV: Regime type (democracy, authoritarian, competitive
    authoritarian)

-   Answer 1: Where linkage to the West was high (IV), competitive
    authoritarian regimes democratized (DV)

-   Answer 2: Where state and governing party structures were well
    organized and cohesive (IV), regimes remained stable and
    authoritarian (DV); where they were underdeveloped or lacked
    cohesion, regimes were unstable, although they rarely democratized.

-   What is competitive authoritarianism?

    -   Not full authoritarianism: regime in which no viable channels
        exist for opposition to contest legally for executive power
        (China, Cuba, Saudi Arabia)

    -   Competitive authoritarian regimes are distinguished from full
        authoritarianism in that constitutional channels exist through
        which opposition groups compete in a meaningful way for
        executive power. Elections are held regularly and opposition
        parties are not legally barred from contesting them. Opposition
        activity is above ground: Opposition parties can open offices,
        recruit candidates, and organize campaigns, and politicians are
        rarely exiled or imprisoned. In short, democratic procedures are
        sufficiently meaningful for opposition groups to take them
        seriously as arenas through which to contest for power.

    -   What distinguishes competitive authoritarianism from democracy,
        however, is the fact that incumbent abuse of the state violates
        at least one of three defining attributes of democracy: (1) free
        elections, (2) broad protection of civil liberties, and (3) a
        reasonably level playing field

    -   Thus, competitive authoritarian states suffer from **unfree
        elections**, **limited/often violated civil liberties**, and
        **uneven playing field for opposition parties**

-   The rise of competitive
    authoritarianism

    -   Competitive authoritarianism is a post--Cold War phenomenon.
        Although a few competitive authoritarian regimes existed during
        the interwar and Cold War periods,87 they proliferated after the
        fall of the Berlin Wall

-   Diverging outcomes: competitive authoritarian regime trajectories,
    1990--2008

-   Explaining divergent outcomes: the argument in brief (not explained
    in this summary)

-   The distinctive logic of competitive authoritarian politics

    -   Informal Institutions: Recent work suggests that actors
        frequently employ informal institutions as a "second-best"
        strategy when they cannot achieve their goals through formal
        institutions but find the cost of changing those institutions to
        be prohibitive

    -   Succession Politics: Unlike most democracies, authoritarian
        succession is often a high-stakes game. Outgoing incumbents
        often face serious risks, including possible seizure of wealth
        and prosecution for corruption or human-rights violations.

    -   Party Behavior: Parties clearly play a dual game in competitive
        authoritarian regimes.155 On the one hand, unlike most
        authoritarian regimes, parties must take seriously elections and
        other democratic institutions; their ability to gain or maintain
        power hinges -- at least, in part -- on their ability to win
        votes and control legislatures. On the other hand, however,
        competing on a skewed playing field often requires strategies
        that have little to do with vote-maximization. Thus, in all but
        a few of our cases,156 opposition parties combined conventional
        (i.e., electoral or parliamentary) strategies with
        extra-institutional ones. For example, oppositions may boycott
        elections in an effort to undermine their domestic or
        international legitimacy.

-   Chapter concludes with a note on methodology and plan for the rest
    of the book

Chapter 2: Explaining Competitive Authoritarian Regime Trajectories:
International Linkage and the Organizational Power of Incumbents

-   The international dimension: linkage and leverage

    -   Mechanisms of international influence

        -   Diffusion: "relatively neutral transmission of information"
            across borders

        -   Direct democracy promotion by Western states, particularly
            the U.S.

        -   Multilateral conditionality: External assistance or
            membership in international organizations (like EU) is
            linked to countries' democratic or human-rights performance

        -   Democracy assistance: Western governments, party
            foundations, and international organizations dramatically
            increased funding in the 1990s for civic-education programs,
            electoral assistance, legal and legislative reform, and
            independent media and civic organizations

        -   Transnational advocacy networks: 9 Human-rights, democracy,
            and election-monitoring NGOs grew rapidly in size, number,
            and influence during the 1980s and 1990s. These
            organizations drew international attention to human-rights
            violations, electoral fraud, and other violations of
            international norms, and they lobbied Western governments to
            take punitive action in response to them

-   Western leverage: Governments' vulnerability to external
    democratizing pressure

    -   Rooted in three factors

        -   The first and most important factor is the size and strength
            of countries' states and economies. Governments in weak
            states with small, aid-dependent economies (e.g., much of
            sub-Saharan Africa) are more vulnerable to external pressure
            than those of larger countries with substantial military
            and/or economic power (e.g., China and Russia)

        -   Second, leverage may be limited by competing Western
            foreign-policy objectives. Where Western powers have
            countervailing economic or strategic interests at stake,
            autocratic governments often possess the bargaining power to
            ward off external demands for democracy by casting
            themselves -- and regime stability -- as the best means of
            protecting those interests. Thus, Western powers have
            exerted little democratizing pressure on major energy
            producers (e.g., Saudi Arabia and Kuwait) or states that are
            deemed strategically important (e.g., Egypt and Pakistan).

        -   Third, leverage may be reduced by the existence of what
            Hufbauer et al. call "black knights," or counter-hegemonic
            powers whose economic, military, and/or diplomatic support
            helps blunt the impact of U.S. or EU democratizing pressure
            (Russia, China, etc.)

    -   Linkage to the West

        -   economic linkage, or flows of trade, investment, and credit

        -   intergovernmental linkage, including bilateral diplomatic
            and military ties as well as participation in Western-led
            alliances, treaties, and international organizations

        -   technocratic linkage, or the share of a country's elite that
            is educated in the West and/or has professional ties to
            Western universities or Western-led multilateral
            institutions

        -   social linkage, or flows of people across borders, including
            tourism, immigration and refugee flows, and diaspora
            networks

        -   information linkage, or flows of information across borders
            via telecommunications, Internet connections, and Western
            media penetration

        -   civil-society linkage, or local ties to Western-based NGOs,
            international religious and party organizations, and other
            transnational networks

    -   The following sections aren't covered in this summary

        -   Shaping Incentives: International Reverberation and the Cost
            of Government Abuse

        -   Shaping Interests: Creating Domestic Constituencies for
            Democratic Behavior

        -   Shaping the Distribution of Power and Resources

    -   Linkage, Leverage, and Democratization


-   The domestic dimension: organizational power and authoritarian
    stability (not covered)

    -   State Coercive Capacity

    -   Party Strength

    -   State Economic Control as a Substitute for Coercive and Party
        Organization

    -   Combining State and Party Strength

    -   The Impact of Opposition Strength

-   Synthesis of the argument