# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Civil Society and the Collapse of the Weimar Republic
author(s): Sheri #Berman
year: #y1997
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Civil_Society #Social_Capital #Democracy #Non-Democracy 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

Sheri Berman: Civil Society and the Collapse of the Weimar Republic
(April 1997):

Berman **argues** that the conventional wisdom of civil society of
Putnam is flawed -- this article shows how civil society helped scuttle
the 20^th^ century's most critical democratic experiment: Weimar
Germany. High levels of associationism, absent strong and responsive
national government and political parties, fragmented rather than unite
German society. Weak institutionalization rather than weak civil society
was the problem.

In the interwar, Germans were very involved in associations out of
frustration with the national government and parties -- the rich
associational life provided a training ground for Nazi cadres -- had
civil society been weaker, Nazis would never have been able to capture
citizens to their cause or tear down their opponents as quickly.

Political institutionalization and associations are just as important as
civil ones -- w/o political institutions, societies lack the trust and
ability to define and realize common interests. Political scientists
need to examine interaction between civil and political associations
more closely.

**Neo-Tocquevillian Theories:**

In 1950s & 1960s -- William Kornhauser & Hannah Arendt turned concept of
'mass society' into a theory for explaining rise of totalitarianism --
industrialization and modernity estranged citizens from one another,
leaving them rootless and searching for ways of belonging. Ripped from
traditional moorings, masses were available for mobilization by
extremists, unless bonds could be developed though organizational
affiliation. In this view the Weimar Republic collapsed because of the
status of mass society -- Hitler's supporters were drawn from alienated
individuals who lacked wide range of associational memberships -- but
empirical evidence does not support this causal sequence.

During 3^rd^ wave of democracy, civil society explanations became
popular again, thanks to Putnam. For Putnam and other neo-Tocquevillian
analysts, "associationism is both an indicator for healthy democracy and
a prerequisite for it."

**Testing the Theory:**

Several reasons why the inability of a Neo-Tocquevillian analysis should
be "significant and troubling":

1.  Scholars view the collapse of the Weimar Republic as a crucial
    theory in theoretical testing -- "the disintegration of democracy in
    interwar Germany is so central to our understanding of comparative
    politics and so critical for the history of modern Europe that we
    should at the least be wary of any theory of political development
    that cannot explain it."

2.  The postwar neo-Tocquevillian scholars highlighted this case as an
    example of the impact of associationism (or lack thereof).

3.  While US is homeland for associationism, Germany is comparable,
    making it a most likely case in determining reliability of
    neo-Tocquevillian theory.

Wilhemine and Weimar Germany were marked by *Vereinsmeierei*
(associational fetishism or mania) -- people joke that whenever 3+
Germans gathered, they were likely to draw up by-laws and found an
association. Max Weber urged colleagues to study German associational
life -- but he noted that associationism in Germany did not lead
directly to responsible citizenship or liberal/democratic values
(Quantitative spread =/= qualitative significance).

Berman finds that "participation in organizations of civil society did
link individuals together and help mobilize them for political
participation, but in the German case this served not to strengthen
democracy but to weaken it." Nazis rose to power not by taking advantage
of alienated individuals, but by exploiting highly activist people,
their skills, and their associational affiliations to expand the party's
appeal and consolidate the party's position.

**Civil Society in Bismarckian and Wilhelmine Germany:**

Germany civil society grew rapidly during late 18^th^ and 19^th^
centuries, spurred by local legal code change, breakdown of
preindustrial corporate traditions, and growing social wealth and
diversification.

Next growth spurt was 1870s with the granting of universal suffrage that
encouraged wide variety of groups to form organizations -- but the
economic downturn of 1870s highlighted vulnerability of certain groups
and increased demands for state aid. The political system set up in 1871
served to widen existing cleavages in German society since political
parties were organized around discrete, particularistic social groups
and national political groups were not strong enough to overcome social
divisions.

Bismarck was able to hold together a majority coalition through "iron
and rye," but by early 1890s, this fell apart as intraparty cleavages
(industry v agriculture, protectionist v free traders, exporters v
domestic producers) threatened to tear apart coalition -- plus the lower
and middle classes were becoming more politically mobilized, challenging
traditional political structures.

By end of 19^th^ century, a troubling pattern appeared -- the growth of
civic associations during periods of strain. When national political
institutions were unable or unwilling to address needs, the people
turned away and looked to civil society instead. Associational life
served not to integrate citizens in the political system, but to divide
them further or mobilize them outside the existing political regime. As
liberal parties stumbled, their constituencies were left unorganized and
many found themselves adrift and looking for alternative ways to become
involved.

Nationalist associations targeted a broad swath of Germany society to
provide engagement channels in public life -- many were not necessarily
"political" organizations and some defined themselves repudiation to
existing political institutions and structures, arguing they were
devoted to "cross-class solidarity and national unity." These groups
also placed the idea of popular legitimacy front and center. They were
horizontally organized, stressing equality and community, devoted to
overcoming narrow particularistic interests.

Although many Germans turned away from national politics, they were not
becoming apolitical -- but the contrary = Germans were becoming
increasingly mobilized and politically active. Some groups did seek
participation in local governments, but many of the other groups were
saw themselves as sanctuaries from traditional politics.

On the eve of WWI, nearly all Germans were discontented with national
political life.

**Summary:** "With the national govt. unresponsive for economic and
political change and traditional political parties unable to adjust to
the era of mass politics, civil society offered an outlet for the
demands and aspirations of an increasingly restive German populace. This
growth of associations during these years did not signal a growth in
liberal values or democratic political structures; instead, it reflected
and furthered the fragmentation of German political life and
delegitimization of national political institutions."

**Civil Society in the Weimar Republic:**

Democratization after WWI opened up a new phase in associational life --
local voluntary associations grew throughout the 1920s, reaching high
levels measured by both historical and comparative standards. But the
same problem existed that was before WWI: the rise of associationism
signaled not the spread of liberal values or the development of a
healthy democracy, but the reverse.

The parties of the bourgeois middle class reconstituted and tried to
appeal as true "people's parties" -- but this was difficult given the
growing economic, political, and social conflicts of the 1920s --
creating a vicious circle. Weak parties and national political
structures drove many citizens to look for support in civil society --
the energy of associational life then served to further undermine and
delegitimize the republic's political structures.

Early years saw two main liberal parties: the German Democratic Party
and the German's People Party, in addition to smaller, regional parties
-- the non-socialist portion of Germany's political spectrum was divided
among a large number of parties and squabbled amongst themselves,
failing to form a single movement or even agree on the important issues
of the day.

The Great Inflation of 1922-23 was the turning point -- middle classes
suffered greatly. This was then followed by stabilization of 1923-24
which also hit white-collar workers and middle class hard. By end of
1920s, the middle class had deteriorated that it was near
indistinguishable from the proletariat on the basis of income.

Economic problems caused all groups to be more jealous of socioeconomic
interests and more strident/narrow in their political demands.
Middle-class groups became increasingly frustrated in
inability/unwillingness of conservative or liberal parties to recognize
needs -- they were seen as tools of capitalists and finance. Further,
local-level party affiliations were allowed to languish or break away.
By 1928, the high point of economic stabilization, splinter parties
outpolled traditional middle-class parties. Middle-class frustration had
caused a growth in associational activity, just as before.

Inverse of neo-Tocquevillian theory: not only did participation in civil
society organizations fail to contribute to republican virtue, but in
fact subverted it. Private associations were correctly seen to offer
benefits \[like community or unity\] that traditional parties could not
provide.

Example: Stahlhelm (WWI veterans party) was very powerful during the
early 1920s by mid-1920s, the organization was becoming disillusioned
with traditional party politics and began to look to nationalist and
populist communitarianism. Many burghers began to transfer their primary
political loyalties from it to center-right and right political parties,
helping to eradicate these parties' authority at the grassroots level.
After 1928, Stahlhelm was losing membership and influence.

As the Great Depression spread through Europe, Germany found itself with
weak political institutions and fragmented but highly organized civil
society -- the ideal setting for the rapid rise to power of a
totalitarian movement.

**The Rise of the NSDAP**

During the 1920s, the Nazi party was stagnant -- by 1926 the situation
was dire, and the party had to shift strategies -- it shifted focus from
urban areas & working-class voters to middle classes, nonvoters, and
farmers -- while proclaiming they were above the group divisions. As
late as 1928, the Nazis polled at only 2.6% of the vote, but four years
later were the biggest party. The depression, weak response from
mainstream parties, and Hitler's charisma all played a role -- but a
significant part of the answer is in contemporary German civil society.

The dense networks of civic engagement gave the Nazis cadres of skilled
activists who could spread the party's message and increase recruitment.
During second half of 1920s, the Nazis concentrated on attracted
bourgeois "joiners" who were disillusioned with traditional party
politics. Civil society activists were the backbone of the Nazi party
grassroots propaganda machine.

Activists not only created a powerful electoral machine but also helped
the Nazis to anchor itself in local communities in a way no other
bourgeois party could. They used local organization to design propaganda
and political events that would mesh and appeal with local social
rhythms.

The Nazis did not just exploit cadres' preexisting associational bonds;
they deliberately infiltrated activists into a wide range of bourgeois
organizations in order to eliminate potential opponents form positions
of power from within. W/O the opportunity to exploit rich associational
networks, the Nazis would not have been able to capture important
sectors of the electorate as quickly and efficiently.

Berman uses German farmers as an example of Nazi methods, pp 422-424.

Nazis had infiltrated and captured national and local associations by
early 1930s -- bridging the gap between bourgeois civil society and
party politics. From this base, they were able to create an effective
political machine and a true cross-class coalition.

**Conclusions: Germany, Associationism, and Political Development:**

German case is a weakness of neo-Tocquevillian theories -- German civil
society was rich and extensive, but it led to illiberalism and
totalitarianism. This does not mean civil society was disconnected from
German political development but was connected in ways that
neo-Tocquevillian theories ignore.

German civil society developed in inverse to vigor and responsiveness of
national political institutions/structures. Instead of reducing social
cleavages, Germany's political institutions exacerbated them. Instead of
responding to demands of mobilized population, the political structures
obstructed meaningful participation. Citizens' energies were deflected
into private associational settings.

Nazis seized on opportunities afforded by such a situation, offering a
unifying appeal and bold solutions to a nation in crisis. Nazi party
drew its critical cadres from among bourgeois civil society activists
that lost their ties to mainstream politics.

From Bismarck onward, German political parties had 2 major weaknesses:

1.  They focused on particular and relatively narrow socioeconomic
    groups instead of reconciling interests of different groups to
    create unity.

2.  Germany's bourgeois parties never adapted to era of mass politics --
    instead they retained an elite organizational style and failed to
    develop strong grassroots or organizations and to cultivate strong
    ties to the associational lives of their constituencies.

The weakness of national political structures was the reason why Germans
joined associations -- but these organizations often catered to members
of specific groups -- they hived members off from the rest of society,
cleaving Germany into increasingly distinct subcultures or communities
with their own separate associational life.

Associationism should be considered a politically neutral multiplier --
neither inherently good nor inherently bad, but rather dependent for its
effects on the wider political context. A failure of neo-Tocquevillians
is the inability to predict whether civil society will have negative or
positive consequences for political development.

If a country's political institutions and structures are capable of
channeling and redressing grievances and the existing political regime
enjoys public support and legitimacy, then associationism will probably
buttress political stability by placing its resources and beneficial
effects in the service of the status quo.

If political institutions and structures are weak and/or existing
political regime is perceived to be ineffectual and illegitimate, then
civil society may become an alternative to politics, increasingly
absorbing citizens' energies an satisfying their basic needs. In such
situations, associationism will probably undermine political stability,
furthering dissatisfaction.
