# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Political Opportunity Structures and Political Protest: Anti-Nuclear Movements in Four Democracies 
author(s): Herbert P. #Kitschelt 
year: #y1986
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Resource_Mobilization #REGIMES 
keywords: #Structure #Protest #comparative_case #Europe #US 

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary


**Political Opportunity Structures and Political Protest: Anti-Nuclear
Movements in Four Democracies.** By Herbert P. Kitschelt (1986)

-   This article is an attempt to use some of the rich detail case
    studies to construct a systematic comparison of the anti-nuclear
    movements in France, Sweden, the United States and West Germany

-   Variations in anti-nuclear movements (choice of protest strategies
    and its impact) between these countries can be explained by
    nation\'s *political opportunity structure*.

Political opportunity structures are comprised of specific
configurations of resources, institutional arrangements and historical
precedents for social mobilization.

**Theoretical approaches:**

[Marxian-macrosociological]{.underline} -- links the emergence of social
movements to various stages in the development of socio-economic modes
of production; anti-nuclear movement viewed as a member of a larger
class of \'new social movements\' as a reaction to of bureaucratic and
technological control that regulate social life in capitalism (cannot
really explain variation in strategy and impact)

[Microsociological]{.underline} -- Seeks to explain the mobilization of
protest and its impact on policy and institutions as direct consequences
of the number and intensity of social \'strains\' and \'grievances\' of
particular social groups (cannot really explain variation in strategy
and impact. existence of strain and relative deprivation is a necessary
but not a sufficient condition of social protest)

R[esource mobilization]{.underline} -- Sees social movements as
collective and rational decision-makers that mobilize their followers
and promote their causes with the best available strategies given
limited cognitive and material resources. More focused on internal
variables (membership recruitment, internal organization, specification
of goals and skills in forming coalitions)

-   The approach of this study however strategic choices and societal
    impacts of movements to specific properties of the external
    political opportunity structures (institutional constraints).

Then author state several reason why the four cases are good points of
comparison (p.60-61):

1.  Share similar operational objectives

2.  In all of the cases, nuclear power conflicts grew from localized
    into national movements

3.  The objective \'threat\' of nuclear power was about the same in each
    country

4.  The subjective sense of deprivation and grievance also was quite
    similar.

5.  Members shared social class bases "middle class radicalism

6.  Shared similar opponents - pro-nuclear coalition

**Explaining strategies and impacts of social movement**

How political opportunity structures influence social movements:

1.  Mobilization depends upon the coercive, normative, remunerative
    informational resources that the movement can extract and employ

2.  The access of social movements to the public sphere and
    decision-making is also governed by institutional rules, such as
    those reinforcing patterns of interaction between government and
    interest groups and electoral laws (60). *(I have no idea what this
    means)*

3.  Opportunities to mobilize other protest movements

-   Scholars distinguish between "open" and "closed" opportunity
    structure. Open is highly responsive to demands while closed is
    repress social movements (this is a continuous scale).

Four factors determine the openness of political regimes:

1.  Number of parties, factions and groups (more parties lees open)

2.  Capacity of legislatures to develop and control policies
    independently of the executive.

3.  Existence of intermediation between interest groups and the
    executive branch

4.  Existence of mechanisms that aggregate demands

Capacity to implement policies also determine the overall responsiveness
of politics to social movements. Here is three operational dimensions
characterize this capacity:

1.  Centralization of state apparatus (more central easier to implement)

2.  Government control over markets. The greater is the control the
    harder to challenge government

3.  Independence of Judiciary from executive. (the more independent the
    harder the implementation)

Political input - is openness. Political output -- is capacity

-   Then author explain why each country received specific
    characterizations (p.65). We can see that all four countries have a
    different configuration of the openness and capacity which
    constitute political opportunity structures.

[How openness and capacity influence social movements'
strategies:]{.underline}

Open with weak capacity -- *assimilative strategy.* Work through the
system (p.66)

Closed with high capacity -- *confrontational strategy*. Work to disrupt
from outside (p.66)

Author also distinguish between three types of impacts:

1.  Procedural- open new channels of participation for protest

2.  Substantive -- changes in policy

3.  Structural -- transform political opportunity structures

-   Procedural gains covary with openness.

-   For substantive gains polity needs open institutions and high
    capacity.

-   Structural impacts will occur when a political system cannot deliver
    either procedural or substantive reforms (p.67).

Table 2 below summarize expectation regarding each country.

Table 3 shows(below), the choice of strategy does not vary at random.
Rather, it varies with the specific type of political opportunity
structure.

-   In open systems activists tried to influence legislatures and
    elections (US and Sweden).

In closed systems activists used more confrontational strategies (West
Germany and France)

-   Strategies towards implementation (output) also varies in accordance
    with capacity classification (weak capacity -- result in stronger
    social movement activity toward output).

-   Confrontational incidents can be found in closed countries

**Political opportunity structures and social movement impacts**

-   If political opportunity structures are responsible for the impact,
    scale of the movement (high or low mobilization) should be
    irrelevant in assessment of its impact.

-   Opinion polls as measurement of scale of the movement is bad but
    this is what he has. There is not direct connection between support
    of the anti-nuclear sentiment and the impact of the movement (p.73).

-   Number of participants in the movement is also a poor predictor of
    its impact (p.73).

Strength of the pro-nuclear opponents also does not really matter
(p.73-74).

**PROCEDURAL IMPACTS**

-   Anti-nuclear movements have made procedural gains when the have been
    able to gain greater access to formal political decision-making.

-   No procedural gains in France and West Germany (pp.75-77)

-   US political system is more open and assimilated anti-nuclear
    demands (e.g. anti-nuclear referendums, activists were appointed to
    high ranking positions in executive branch) this allowed effective
    blocking of any coherent policy of pro-nuclear actors.

-   Because Sweden is super open, they had national debate and even
    national referendum on the issue which stopped nuclear program. But
    in Sweden they could not influence Nuclear plant licensure
    proceeding.

**SUBSTANTIVE POLICY IMPACTS**

-   Sweden and the United States were most tolerant of the anti-nuclear
    opposition -\> steady or declining number of plants planned and
    built in the last decade.

-   France\'s program continues to grow and to grow rapidly.

-   Author rejects alternative explanation of changes in electricity
    demand (p.78)

-   Where political opportunity structures were conducive to popular
    participation, anti-nuclear activists could impose economic
    penalties on nuclear builders, by slowing the construction of plants
    being built and increasing the risk of future investment. In the
    United States, Sweden and West Germany, anti-nuclear activists were
    continually able to raise the costs of plants, but those in France
    were unable to do this.

Table 6 shows effectiveness of delays strategies.

In Sweden nuclear policy was changed not by disrupting the policy
implementation process but by working through the \'input side\' of
politics.

While governments in all four countries targeted their financial support
almost exclusively on nuclear research until the mid-I970s, funding of
new energy technologies managed to take off in the two open regimes.
(see table below)

Author also rejects different alternative explanation: Electoral change,
import dependence.

**STRUCTURAL IMPACTS OF ANTI-NUCLEAR MOVEMENTS**

Where the political input structures are closed, noteworthy efforts have
been made to realign the party system. New \'green\' or ecological
parties have appeared and adopted the nuclear issue as a major plank in
their political programs. Therefore, ecological parties are stronger in
regimes that are less responsive to anti-nuclear demands, such as France
and West German.

**Conclusion**

mobilization strategies and impacts of social movements ca be explained
by political opportunity structure

Open and responsive political structures (Sweden and US) -\> search for
new policy

Close political structures (France and West Germany) - \>follow
predetermined policy course

Weak capacity (US and West Germany) -\>protest had a chance to disrupt
policy

High openness plus high capacity - \>greater innovation
