# Metadata
## Identifiers
title:  Resource Mobilization and Social Movements: A Partial Theory
author(s): John D. #McCarthy, Mayer N. #Zald
year: #y1977
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Resource_Mobilization #Collective_Action #Structure
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary




Resource Mobilization and Social Movements: A Partial Theory\'

By: John D. McCarthy, Mayer N. Zald

This essay presents the concepts around resource mobilization, and its
links to other aspects of social theory. The dependent variable is
different levels of inclusiveness.

Previously, almost all theories of social movements stressed the
necessary problem of resource mobilization. Then other sociologists were
adding in a set of assumptions based on social structures. So in
combining the two the newest approach is incorporating things like
political behavior theories, rather than the social psychology of
collective behavior. (1213)

This paper is present a partial theory relating both resource
mobilization and social movements. The examples are mostly American, so
that limits the insights. And primarily focusing on 'left' social
movements. This paper will define:

SMS:social movement sector

SMI: social movement industry

SMO: social movement organizations

*Perspectives Emphasizing Deprivation and Beliefs*

Common knowledge assumptions: discontent is produced by some combination
of structural conditions, and collective action is possible within a
collectivity.

The authors are questioning the universality of those two assumptions.
There is little empirical evidence for those issues. The authors want to
move from strong assumption of deprivation to a weaker one. They are
willing to assume that, "that there is always enough discontent in any
society to supply the grass-roots support for a movement if the movement
is effectively organized and has at its disposal the power and resources
of some established elite group" (quote from Turner and Killian, 1215)
And that grievances and discontent may be defined, created, and
manipulated by issue entrepreneurs and organizations.

Rather than a particularly strong grievance, the organization drives the
movement.

*Resource Mobilization*

All resource mobilization has to overcome the collective action problem.
The authors draw specific contracts with the traditional theory.

1.  Support Base:

    a.  Traditional: Social movement are based on discontent populations
        who bring in resources and labor

    b.  Resource Mobilization(the authors): they may/may not be based on
        discontent populations. Those who provide money and time do not
        need to be in that population

2.  Strategy and Tactics

    a.  Traditional: Social movements use bargaining, persuasion, or
        violence to influence authorities.

    b.  Resource Mobilization: Social movements have a larger number of
        tactics, and often there is a dilemma conflict with different
        tactics

3.  Relation to larger society

    a.  Traditional: How hostile is the population/movement seen in
        society?

    b.  Resource Mobilization: Society gives the infrastructure of the
        social movement. Media, expenses, affluence, are all structural.

*Theoretical Elements*

Social movement: "a set of opinions and beliefs in a population which
represents preferences for changing some elements of the social
structure and/or reward distribution of a society" (1217-1218)

Countermovement: "is a set of opinions and beliefs in a population
opposed to a social movement. As is clear, we view social movements as
nothing more than preference structures directed toward social change,
very similar to what political sociologists would term issue cleavages"
(1218)

Social movement organization: " is a complex, or formal, organization
which identifies its goals with the preferences of a social movement or
a countermovement and attempts to implement those goals" aka NAACP
(1218)

Social Movement Industry: All SMOs that have as their goal the
attainment of the broadest preferences of a social movement . (1219)

> All of the different SMOs form the Civil Rights Movement

Most SMs, are represented by more than one SMO. The definition of SMI is
closely related the the creation of an industry in economics.

Social Movement Sector: "consists of all SMIs in a society no matter to
which SM they are attached." (1220)

Characteristics of an SMO:

They have:

-   Target goals, can be broad or narrow

-   Resources of labor and capital

-   Adherents, those who believe in the SMO

    -   Conscience adherents: individuals who will NOT gain from the SMO

-   Constituents: those who provide resources

    -   Conscience constituents, individuals who provide resources and
        will not gain

-   Potential beneficiaries, those who will gain if the SMO's beliefs
    are adopted

There are some patterns with SMO's. Often SMO resources are limited, so
they will try to add more constituents from beneficiaries. And the
number of beneficiaries will determine how mass/elite the organization
is.

*The Elements applied: Illustrative Hypotheses*

Hypothesis 1: "As the amount of discretionary resources of mass and
elite publics increases, the absolute and relative amount of resources
available to the SMS increases." (1225)

This one makes sense, as more money becomes available the SMS is another
thing for people to put resources into. Also, as society has become
richer, there is more technological ability to coordinate the SMS.

Hypothesis 2: "The greater the absolute amount of resources available to
the SMS the greater the likelihood that new SMIs and SMOs will develop
to compete for these resources" (1225)

> Resources are driving the emergence.

Hypothesis 3: " Regardless of the resources available to potential
beneficiary adherents, the larger the amount of resources available to
conscience adherents the more likely is the development of SMOs and SMIs
that respond to preferences for change" (1225)

This hypothesis is a critique to interest group pluralism. That it isn't
the discontent driving the SMO.

*Organizational Structure and resource mobilization:*

SMO's work like any other organization. There are different types of
constituent involvement. There are *cadre,* individuals who are involved
with actual decision making. Often they are some who are full time
employees, but mostly that is done by professional staff. Next there
are, *transitory team* members. They are constituents who are led by
some cadre for a specific task, for a short period of time.

Federated Structure: An SMO divided into local chapters

Isolated Structure: An SMO that communicates with constituents through
mass communication.

Hypothesis 4: "The more a SMO is dependent upon isolated constituents
the less stable will be the flow of resources to the SMO" (1228)

Resources are dependent on more close involvement and organization. Part
of this instability is that there are multiple SMO's competing for
resources from potential constituents. The authors want use to treat the
SMO's target goals as product, and the adherents as demand, then do a
simple economic model. How elastic is the product?

Hypothesis 4a: "The more dependent a SMO is upon isolated constituents
the greater the share of its resources which will be allocated to
advertising" (1230)

Hypothesis 4b: "The more a SMO depends upon isolated constituents to
maintain a resource flow the more its shifts in resource flow resemble
the patterns of consumer expenditures for expendable and marginal
goods"(1230)

The authors believe that the federated structure is better at avoiding
these issues.

Hypothesis 5: "A SMO which attempts to link both conscience and
beneficiary constituents to the organization through federated chapter
structures, and hence solidary incentives, is likely to have high levels
of tension and conflict" (1231)

Combining many of the hypothesis together. Conscience constituents are
more likely to control larger resource pools, they are also more likely
to be adherents to more than one SMO and SMI. So they have conflicting
loyalties. So despite their resources, often SMO leader's are more
skeptical.

*Rates of Resource Fluctuation and SMO adaption:*

Hypothesis 6: " Older, established SMOs are more likely than newer SMOs
to persist throughout the cycle of SMI growth and decline."(1233)

This pattern matches most industries. Older organizations have a higher
level of professionalism.

Hypothesis 7: "The more competitive a SMI (a function of the number and
size of the existing SMOs) the more likely it is that new SMOs will
offer narrow goals and strategies"(1234)

Hypothesis 8: "The larger the income flow to a SMO the more likely that
cadre and staff are professional and the larger are these groups" (1234)

The more money the organization has, the more full time professional
staff.

Hypothesis 9: "The larger the SMS and the larger the specific SMIs the
more likely it is that SM careers will develop."(1235)

As the sector grows it is more likely the universities or other
organizations will develop career connections and opportunities.

Hypothesis 10: "The more a SMO is funded by isolated constituents the
more likely that beneficiary constituent workers are recruited for
strategic purposes rather than for organizational work"(1235)

This is central to the strategy of a professional SMO. Getting
beneficiary constituent workers involved is how that organization grows
without needing to have constituent donors.

Hypothesis 11: "The more a SMO is made up of workers with discretionary
time at their disposal the more readily it can develop transitory
teams."

Large numbers of teams can impress authorities, and bystanders, to add
to the demonstration.
