
# Metadata
## Identifiers
title:  The logic of collective action
author(s): Mancur #Olson
year: #y1965
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Collective_Action #Rational_Choice #Redistribution 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary


Olson. 1965. The logic of collective action. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.

Notes: Tim

\*I found a summary online that spelled it out nicely. (Better than the
one last week, sorry)

Olson lays out his general theory in chapter 1, where he discusses
individual rationality, selective incentives, and so on.

**Three kinds of groups**

1.  **Privileged groups** (members of this group would gain more from a
    public good than it would cost them to provide it unilaterally);

2.  **Latent groups** (any member of this group could withhold his
    contribution to the public good without causing a noticeable
    reduction in its supply); and

3.  **Intermediate groups** (if any member of this group withholds his
    contribution, it will cause a noticeable decrease in supply of the
    good, or a noticeable rise in cost to other contributors).

**Variables and hypotheses**

*Y = common goods provision; X = group size*

-   As group size increases, provision of the common good becomes less
    optimal. You can only have optimal provision of the common good if
    the marginal costs are shared in \"exactly the same proportion as
    the additional benefits\" (30).

-   If there is a PRIVILEGED group, the good will always be provided

-   If there is an INTERMEDIATE group, the good might be provided.

-   If there is only a LATENT group, the good won\'t be provided without
    coercion or selective incentives.

-   Small stakeholders will tend to exploit big stakeholders (i.e. make
    them pay a larger share)

**Why large groups have problems**

Large groups have problems providing common goods for three reasons:

1.  each group member has a lower share of the benefits;

2.  so it\'s less likely that anybody\'s benefits of helping provide the
    good exceed the costs;

3.  and organizational costs rise with group size.

**Exclusive vs inclusive goods**

There are two kinds of common goods: **exclusive** and **inclusive**.

-   With **exclusive common goods**, the supply is limited. Think of a
    cartel; each firm wants to increase output (to increase its
    profits), but if all firms do this, the profits disappear (as the
    price falls). The supply of profits is limited, so it is an
    exclusive good.

-   With **inclusive goods**, however, supply is not limited. Whether
    more members are welcome depends on whether the good is exclusive or
    inclusive. Firms prefer to have few competitors because goods are
    exclusive; unions prefer to maximize membership because its goods
    are inclusive, and having more members spreads the costs around
    more.

**Group Size and Group Behavior**

-   Social pressure can be an effective (negative) selective incentive

-   Large groups can work better if they are \"federal\" (63)

Orthodox Theories of State and Class

In chapter 4, Olson applies his theory of collection action to a review
of what he calls \"orthodox theories.\" Although he starts by looking
elsewhere, the chapter rapidly becomes a review of Marxism. Marx was
often criticized for placing too much emphasis on self-interest (in his
view, ideology, religion, and everything else were just veiled ways for
one class to express its wealth-maximizing interests). The state was the
means by which one class could oppress another. What Marx missed,
however, was that the rational individuals he envisioned would not have
an incentive to participate in the class revolts he predicted. Lenin
appears to have understood the problem; in \"What is to be Done,\" Lenin
argued that communists would need to be led by a committed, disciplined,
self-sacrificing minority.

Olson does point out that in some cases group behavior might be prompted
by irrational causes (108). Perhaps later works by
[[Horowitz]{.underline}](http://wikisum.com/w/Horowitz:_Ethnic_groups_in_conflict)
and [[Gurr]{.underline}](http://wikisum.com/w/Gurr:_Why_men_rebel) fit
into this field.
