# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Transnational Advocacy Networks
author(s): Margaret E. #Keck, Kathryn #Sikkink
year: #y1998
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s):  #Collective_Action #Culture 
keywords: #Transnational #Networks

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

Summary of Keck & Sikkink - Transnational Activist Networks

Networks: forms of organizations characterized by voluntary, reciprocal,
and horizontal patterns of communication and exchange. Major actors in
advocacy networks may include the following

1.  International and domestic nongovernmental research and advocacy
    organizations

2.  Local social movements

3.  Foundations

4.  The media

5.  Churches, trade unions, consumer organizations, and intellectuals

6.  Parts of regional and international intergovernmental organizations

7.  Parts of the executive and/or parliamentary branches of governments

Groups in a network share values and frequently exchange information and
services. Advocacy networks are not new (Example: 19th century campaign
for the abolition of slavery). Number, size, professionalism, speed,
density, complexity of international linkages have increased in the last
30 years.

Transnational advocacy networks appear most likely to emerge around
those issues where:

1.  Channels between domestic groups and their governments are blocked
    or hampered or where such channels are ineffective for resolving a
    conflict

2.  Activists of "political entrepreneurs believe that networking will
    further their missions and campaigns, and actively promote networks

3.  Conferences and other forms of international contact create arenas
    for forming and strengthening networks

Many advocacy networks address claims about rights in their campaigns
because governments are the primary "guarantors" of rights, as well as
the primary violators. When a government violates rights, individuals
and groups may seek international connections to express their concerns
and protect their lives.

Activists create transnational networks (people who care enough about
some issue that they are prepared to incur significant costs and act to
achieve their goals). They create them when they believe that
transnational networking will further their organizational missions
(sharing information, attaining greater visibility, gaining access to
wider publics, multiplying channels of institutional access, etc...).
(Example: boycott of Nestle)

Transnational advocacy networks seek influence in may of the same ways
that political groups or social movements do. They use power of their
information, ideas, and strategies to alter the information and value
contexts within which states make policies. They use persuasion and
socialization. Their efforts include:

1.  Information politics - the ability to quickly and credibly generate
    politically usable information and move it to where it will have the
    most impact

2.  Symbolic politics - ability to call upon symbols, actions, or
    stories that make sense of a situation for an audience that is
    frequently far away

3.  Leverage politics - ability to call upon powerful actors to affect a
    situation where weaker members of a network are unlikely to have
    influence

4.  Accountability politics - the effort to hold powerful actors to
    their previously stated policies or principles

Information politics

· Information binds network members together and is essential for
network effectiveness

· Information flows in advocacy networks through facts and testimony --
used to persuade people and stimulate them to act

o How does persuasion work? à need effective frame

· Networks strive to uncover and investigate problems, alert the press
and policymakers

o Human rights methodology, promoting change by reporting facts

· Networks call attention to issues, even create issues by using
language that dramatizes and draws attention to their concerns (example:
female genital mutilation -- use of term mutilation)

· Activists turn the cold facts into human stories -- baby food campaign

· Media is essential partner in network information politics -- networks
strive to attract press attention à sympathetic journalists, activists
also cultivate reputation for credibility

Symbolic politics

· Activists frame issues by identifying and providing convincing
explanations for powerful symbolic events, which in turn become
catalysts for the growth of networks

· Symbolic interpretation part of the process of persuasion -- networks
create awareness and expand constituencies

· Example: Nobel Peace Prize to Maya activist Rigoberta Menchu and the
UN's designation of 1993 as the Year of Indigenous Peoples

Leverage Politics

· Activists in advocacy networks are concerned with political
effectiveness -- definition of effectiveness often includes some policy
change by "target actors" (governments, international financial
institutions, private actors like transnational corporations)

· Networks need to pressure and persuade more powerful actors à networks
seek leverage

· Weak groups can gain influence far beyond their ability to influence
state practices directly

· Material leverage links issue to money or goods

· Human rights issue became negotiable because governments or financial
institutions connected human rights practices to military and economic
aid

· "mobilization of shame" -- behavior of target actors is held up to the
light of international scrutiny

Accountability Politics

· Networks devote considerable energy to convincing governments and
other actors to publicly change their positions on issues

· Try to make such statements into opportunities for accountability
politics -- networks use positions, their command of information to
expose the distance between discourse and practice

· Example: 1975 Helsinki Accords

Summary of Keck and Sikkink -- Transnational Advocacy Networks in
International Politics: Introduction

Transnational advocacy networks are networks of activists,
distinguishable largely by the centrality of principled ideas or values
in motivation their formation. They are proliferating; their goal is to
change the behavior of states and of international organizations. They
frame issues to make them comprehensible to target audiences, to attract
attention and encourage action, and to fit with favorable institutional
venues. They promote norm implementation by pressuring target actors to
adopt new policies, and by monitoring compliance with international
standards. They seek to maximize their influence or leverage over the
target of their actions. Networks are communicative structures.
Activists may engage and become part of larger policy communities that
group actors working on an issue from a variety of institutional and
value perspectives.

The authors argue that we can't accurately count transnational advocacy
networks to measure growth over time, but one proxy is the increase in
the number of international NGOs committed to social change. The number
of international nongovernmental social change groups has increased
across all issues, although to varying degrees. (a hell of a lot of
human rights groups emerged, even though it doesn't actually add up to
much in the grand scheme of things -- still a lot of world order,
international law, peace, women's rights, environment, development,
ethnic unity, Esperanto groups)

To assess the influence of advocacy networks we must look at goal
achievement as several different levels. The authors identify various
stages of network influence: issue creation and agenda setting,
influence on discursive positions of states and international
organizations, influence on institutional procedures, influence on
policy change in "target actors" which may be states, international
organizations, or private actors, and influence on state behavior.

· Generate attention to new issues and help set agendas when they
provoke media attentions, debates, hearings, and meetings on issues that
previously had not been a matter of public debate

· Networks influence discursive positions when they help persuade states
and international organizations to support international declarations or
to change stated policy positions

· Targets of network campaigns frequently respond to demands for policy
change with changes in procedures

· Activities can produce changes in policies, not only of the target
states, but also of other states and/or international institutions

The authors argue that advocacy network concepts cannot be subsumed
under notions of transnational social movements or global civil society.
They contend that they lack convincing studies of the sustained and
specific processes through which individuals and organizations create
something resembling a global civil society. Their research does not
claim emergence of a global civil society. They state that they would be
more comfortable with a concept of a transnational civil society as an
arena of struggle, a fragmented and contested area.

The authors then discuss human rights advocacy networks in Latin
America. In the 1970s the Argentine military secretly kidnapped,
detained, abused, and killed victims while denying their whereabouts.
Amnesty International visited in 1976 and reported an estimated number
of 6000 political prisoners. This report helped demonstrate that the
disappearances were part of a deliberate government policy. This
information then led the Carter administration, as well as French,
Swedish, and Italian governments to denounce the human rights
violations. The US government reduced the planned level of military aid
for Argentina and then Congress passed a bill that eliminated all
military assistance.

Essentially, outside forces put pressure on Argentina because of Amnesty
International exposing them. This created Argentine domestic human
rights organizations to develop big external contacts. The Argentine
human rights violations stayed in the mind of the US and Europe (because
of the release of Jacobo Timerman and Nobel Peace Prize to Adolfo Perez
Esquivel, an activist). The junta adopted a sequence of responses to
international pressures:

· They denied it (always a good plan)

· This was super obvious, so concerned states in the UN created the "UN
Working Group on Disappearances" in 1980

· Argentina then realized they had to do something so they invited the
Inter-American Commissions on Human Rights for an on-site visit in
exchange for a commitment to funds and to improve relations -- the human
rights situation then improved significantly

They moved from refusal to accept human rights interventions and then
cooperated with the human rights network and eventually made concrete
improvements in response to pressure. Then, after they were
democratized, Argentina put a lot of the junta on trial for human rights
abuses. The authors argue that this case set important precedents. They
then conclude by saying that realism wouldn't be able to explain this or
attribute any significance. In liberal versions, states and nonstate
actors cooperate to realize joint gains or avoid mutually undesirable
outcomes -- but humans rights aren't so easy...surprisingly complicated.
It is primarily principled ideas that drive change and cooperation (yay
constructivism)
