# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Solidary Groups, Informal Accountability, and Local Public Goods Provision in Rural China
author(s): Lily L. #Tsai
year: #y2007
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Informal_Institutions #Non-Democracy #Public_Good_Provision 
keywords: #Accountability

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

### First Summary

Lily L. Tsai, 2007, "Solidary Groups, Informal Accountability, and Local
Public Goods Provision in Rural China," American Political Science
Review 101 (2).

Puzzle: Why would government officials in authoritarian/transitional
systems ever provide more than the minimum level of public goods needed
to maintain social stability, given that formal democratic and
bureaucratic institutions of accountability are typically weak?

Answer: Informal governmental accountability comes when citizens award
government moral standing for providing public goods.

Key terms:

**Solidary groups** - groups based on shared moral obligations and share
interests

Two traits of solidary groups necessary for ensuring informal
accountability

**Encompassing** - solidary group is open to everyone under the local
government's jurisdiction

**Embedding** - solidary group incorporates local officials into the
group as members

(English parish churches are embedding, because officials may attend,
but US citizen watchdog groups typically aren't, because officials
*don't* want to participate in those.)

**Causal Mechanism:**

Embedding + Encompassing Solidary Groups → Common Moral Standards →
Officials acting in community's interests receive commendation at key
social/cultural events.

*"In localities with encompassing and embedding solidary groups,
citizens and officials are more likely to share a common set of ethical
standards and moral obligations...*

*Members of clans are expected to and commended for siding with fellow
members in disputes with outsiders. Group activities and dense social
networks also provide ample opportunities for individual members to
publicize their exemplary behavior....*

*In rural China lineage members are expected to attend group rituals of
respect for shared ancestors. These collective gatherings help publicize
who is deserving of moral standing in the community*" (Tsai 2007, 356).

"*A local official with sufficient moral standing may also be able to
win over particularly stubborn opponents of a policy*" (Tsai 2007, 358).

**Research Design**

-   **Examined variation in governmental provision of public goods
    within same country, at village level**

-   316 village survey in Shanxi, Hebei, Jiangxi, and Fujian provinces;
    2 months fieldwork in 7 provinces, 8 months in Fujian province

-   Shanxi and Hebei (north, interior/coastal, less and better
    developed)

-   Jiangxi and Fujian (south, interior/coastal, less and better
    developed)

-   Selected 2 counties, one with "model county status" for village
    democratic reforms, but both with same economic and geographic
    criteria.

-   Selected 8 townships through random stratified sampling, by income
    per capita

-   Selected 5 villages within each township

-   Interviewed one village officials, or, if necessary, their team, to
    complete a structured survey instrument.

-   Used students from localities through cooperation with Chinese
    universities to administer survey, enabling trust and frankness from
    survey respondents.

-   Qualitative case study of town of "West Gate" in Fujian, looking at
    role of solidary groups.

-   Uses "Seemingly unrelated regression" on geographic and demographic
    controls, economic controls, and democratic and bureaucratic
    institutions (**Table 1 below**) to test intercorrelations between
    solidary group measures and public goods outcomes (**Table 3
    below)**.

Qualitative Case Study: Village Temples, West Gate, Fujian Province

*"Because the Communist Party discourages "superstitious" activities,
village officials refrain from taking leadership positions in the
temple, but as ordinary members of the temple group, they diligently
fulfill their obligations to contribute to the good of the group. These
obligations make West Gate's officials very responsive to citizen
demands for public goods and services. In exchange, the temple gives the
village officials a good name or, as the temple council head notes,
"half of the spotlight." Council members also help officials mobilize
villagers to attend meetings convened by the village government,
convince villagers to give rights-of- way for the construction of a
public drainage channel, and monitor the state ban on firecrackers
during festivals\"* (Tsai 358).

Qualitative Case Study: Village Churches, South Bend, Fujian Province:

In contrast, the church highly regulates village churches, making local
officials not embedded in them. "*\[The Party secretary of South Bend\]
complains bitterly about his lack of authority among villagers whom he
says do not trust him because he never goes to church. Instead, he says,
the church management committee makes all the important decisions in the
village. South Bend's village Party secretary is unable to benefit from
the moral standing that the church can confer because the state does not
allow him to participate as a member... Village government funds are
spent instead on the wages of village officials, and the village
government does not fund or organize public services. Villagers do not
listen to the village Party secretary, and there is a high level of tax
evasion"* (Tsai 359).

Qualitative Case Study: Lineage Groups, Li Settlement, Jianxi Province
and Pan Settlement, Hebei Province

*In Li Settlement, village officials helped renovate auditorium into
village ancestral hall*

-   Officials demonstrate commitment to lineage by participating in
    rituals and organizing public projects. They work out of their homes
    instead of using public funds to build a government office building.

-   They held lineage banquet to solicit donations from members, but
    only have building up credibility by showing they were willing to
    invest their own resources and reputation.

*In Pan Settlement, officials rare embedded in specific neighborhood
groups, not village wide org*

-   Village officials cannot organize public projects on same scale as
    neighboring villages

-   Villagers publicly berated officials for central government policy

**Results:**

-   Temple, church, and lineage activity correlated with usable
    classrooms in rain

-   Church and Lineage activity correlated with paved roads

"\[W\]hen formal institutions of accountability are weak, citizens can
still make government officials organize and fund the public goods that
they want and need when they have the right kind of social groups.
Solidary groups that are structured so that they overlap and mesh with
government structures can provide local government officials with
important incentives to provide the pub-lic goods and services that
citizens demand even when democratic or bureaucratic institutions do not
work effectively. By participating in encompassing solidary groups and
fulfilling obligations to work for the good of the group, local
officials can earn access to the moral authority conferred by these
groups, which can be invaluable for pursuing their personal interests
and for carrying out state tasks. Solidary groups which are not both
encompassing and embedding may still be able to mobilize their members
and provide some public goods and services themselves-----but they are
less able to hold the government responsible for providing these goods
and services."


### Second SUMMARY

**Solidary Groups, Informal Accountability, and Local Public Goods
Provision in Rural China, LILY L. TSAI 2007**

**Abstract**

Why would government officials in authoritarian and transitional systems
where formal democratic and bureaucratic institutions of accountability
are often weak ever provide more than the minimum level of public goods
needed to maintain social stability? Findings from a unique combination
of in-depth case study research and an original survey of 316 villages
in rural China indicate that even when formal accountability is weak,
local officials can be subject to unofficial rules and norms that
establish and enforce their public obligations. These informal
institutions of accountability can be provided by encompassing and
embedding solidary groups. Villages where these types of groups exist
are more likely to have better local governmental public goods provision
than villages without these solidary groups, all other things being
equal.

**A MODEL OF INFORMAL GOVERNMENTAL ACCOUNTABILITY**

Elinor Ostrom (1990) finds that well-designed community social
institutions can help overcome obstacles to collective action. Robert
Putnam (1993, 2000) argues that dense social networks and norms of trust
can make people more likely to cooperate with each other. But these
scholars did not address the problem of accountability of governmental
public goods provision in systems with weak formal democratic
institution. Tsai propose a model of informal governmental
accountability from moral standing. Moral standing can be a powerful
incentive. It not only makes people feel good about themselves, but also
it can translate into economic and social advancement. Local officials
with higher moral standing may also find it easier to elicit citizen
compliance with state policies. I argue that people are more likely to
use moral standing to reward local officials for good public goods
provision when there are local solidary groups-----groups based on
shared moral obligations as well as shared interests.

To hold local officials accountable for public goods provisions,
solidary groups must have two particular structural characteristics.
First, they must be encompassing, or open to everyone under the local
government's jurisdiction. Second, solidary groups must

be embedding in that they incorporate local officials into the group as
members. Not all encompassing solidary groups are embedding.

**Research Design and Estimation**

Period of Study: 1999-2002

Surveyed 316 Villages in 4 provinces, by state approval and hiring
students from theses areas. Few villages are able to fund roads and
school buildings and water infrastructure.

Having a paved road often makes it less likely that a village will have
running water. Thus, intercorrelations among the public goods provision
measures are low, and the measures do not scale together. Using
Seemingly Unrelated Regression: SUR to look simultaneously at multiple
measures of village governmental public goods provision allows for the
possibility that different places prioritize different goods.

**Solidary Groups in Rural China**

Village temples: Encompassing and Embedding

Village Church: Encompassing but not Embedding

(Because China did not allow state official to belong to Christian
organization)

One Lineage Group in a village: Encompassing and Embedding

Multiple Lineage Groups in a village: Encompassing but not Embedding

**DV, IV and Control**

DV: A total of six measures for village governmental public goods
provision are used: per capita village government expenditure on public
projects in 2000, the existence of paved village roads; the existence of
paved village paths, the proportion of village classrooms usable in
rainy weather, the newness of the village school building (this measure
was converted from the age of the school building so that a higher
number indicates a newer building), and the existence of running water.

IV: Two measures are used for village temple groups: the existence of a
formal temple manager (a dichotomous variable) and the percentage of
households participating in village temple reconstruction projects. Two
dichotomous variables are used for village

church groups: the existence of a state-approved Protestant minister or
Catholic priest who organizes church services and activities and the
existence of a church that has been renovated or rebuilt in the reform
period. The clearest and most easily observed indication of organized
lineage group activities is the existence of an ancestral hall with
ancestor spirit tablets.

**Result** Solidary Groups which is Both Encompassing and Embedding hold
officials accountable for public provision. Only Encompassing is not
satisfactory, Embedding is more important.

**My thought** Table 1: Surname Fragmentation Index is very interesting
proxy variable.
