# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Electoral Institutions and the Politics of Coalitions: Why Some Democracies Redistribute More Than Others 
author(s): Torben #Iversen and David #Soskice
year: #y2006
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Institutions #Redistribution #REGIMES #Public_Good_Provision 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

Electoral Institutions and the Politics of Coalitions: Why Some
Democracies Redistribute More Than Others by Torben Iversen and David
Soskice (2006)

The question is stated in the title of the article. There is an obvious
answer that more left leaning governments distribute more than right
leaning ones. Consequently, we need to focus on the question why some
governments are more left-leaning, and some are more right-leaning. The
answer that the authors suggest lies in coalitional dynamic which is
determined by the electoral system.

Table 1 shows that proportinal electoral system creates more left-wing
goverments while majoritarian creates more right-wing governments.

**The model:**

*Sasha: Their model is based on the rational choice formal modeling and
game theory. They use a lot of formulas that I omit here I will explain
them in plain English*

The basic assumptions are:

High income class don't want to be taxed

Low income class want higher taxes on high- and middle-income classes.

Middle income class has different incentives in different electoral
systems (will be explained further)

[Proportional representation (PR)]{.underline}

For the sake of simplicity, they provide imaginary country with three
classes: low(L) middle (M) and high (H).

In this country government has to be based on a coalition of two
parties. So, it will be either LM or MH. Basically, Middle class party
determines the outcome of the coalition government.

In the case of MH, middle class would not be taxed.

In case of LH they can tax high income class and divide the pie with L.

From the cost benefit analysis, it is better for M to team up with low
income party. In addition, Because L party can not function without M
party (need two parties for coalition) M party can believe the promises
of L party not to tax M (otherwise they can leave the coalition any
moment).

[Majoritarian system]{.underline}

In majoritarian system we basically have two parties LM and MH. So, the
middle class is split between the L and H the one that has more M wins
in the end. So naturally (as Downs suggested) Both parties try to
represent themselves as good for M people. But (unlike in coalition
agreement in PR) the campaign promises are not binding. There is always
a chance that in the end LM party will cater more to the interests of L
and MH party will cater more to the interests of H.

Voters learn about those risks during the campaign (each side tries to
convey the risk about the opponent)

**Implications for partisanship and redistribution**

[Majoritarian: Explaining the MH Bias]{.underline}.

In majoritarian system for M is more rational to team up with H because
in worst-case scenario H will cancel redistribution so neither M nor H
will be taxed. While in the worst-case scenario of LM, L may decide to
tax both M and H and to redistribute taxes for low income voters.
Consequently, M may not be supportive of H general policies, but M has
less to fear from H polices compare to L policies.

[Proportional representation: explaining left-wing bias]{.underline}

One of the assumptions of their model is that in redistribution policy L
cannot be excluded from the redistribution even in the case of MH
coalition (it is hard to imagine a regressive tax policy nowadays).

So, in proportional representation for M is more beneficial to team up
with L because they can expect some gains from redistributive policy
that will be directed mostly against H. and as I mentioned earlier there
is no threat of L catering only for L because they cannot function in
the government without M.

In their research they test two things:

-   Partisanship and electoral system as an explanation for
    redistribution policy

-   Electoral system shapes the composition of the government
    (right-center v. left-center)

Data for countries between 1967-1990

The description of their variables is on the page 173 (*it is easy to
use even in class, so I omit it here*)

**Findings**


-   Right partisanship has strong negative impact on redistribution

-   PR system has a direct positive effect on redistribution

-   PR system creates more left-wing governments (se e table 1 and table
    7)

They Use this CoG index in order to measure relative lift right position
and not absolute
