# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Chapter 7: Political Ideologies as Means of Getting Votes (96-113)
author(s): Anthony #Downs
year: #y1957
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Party_Politics #Ideology
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary




Downs Chapter 7: Political Ideologies as Means of Getting Votes (96-113)

(Note: Downs uses the word Weltanschauungen throughout the chapter, but
it basically means ideology/worldview)

*Introduction:*

**The basic hypothesis states that political parties are more interested
in getting/staying in office, not in promoting a better or an ideal
society.** BUT if this was true, why do parties organize themselves by
ideology? It is because reality is very uncertain. Therefore,
**ideologies are specific weapons, "in the struggle for office"** (96) I

Ideology defined: "as a verbal image of the good society and the chief
means of constructing such a society."(96)

According to this ideologies are "as means to power" (97) Parties aren't
agents of a specific section of society, but rather as just a means to
obtain office/power, and the group support is a means to an end.

*Chapter objectives*

*The Role of Uncertainty*

A.  Ideologies in a certain world

If the world was perfectly certain, then ideologies would be
differentiating themselves as much as possible, but also trying to make
policies that the majority desire. Therefore, all differences would be
exclusively on the policy level.

B. How Uncertainty makes ideologies useful to voters

Voters don't know what decisions the government is making, and the
effort to actually find out and understand isn't worth the cost.
Therefore, the party ideology is useful. That ideology removes the need
to actually understand policy decisions.

Rather than comparing different government policy proposals, the voters
simply supports the party with the most similar ideology.

To the highly informed voter, they will actually understand the policy
differences, and then use ideology only when the outcomes are identical.
But to the uninformed voter, ideology is the first and only decision.

C. How uncertainty makes ideologies useful to political parties

Parties know that a large part of the population only cares about
ideology. Therefore, parties are picking their ideology only to gain
votes. So there are three factors that determine the variance of party
ideologies:

1.  The heterogeneity of society

2.  The inevitability of social conflict

3.  uncertainty (100)

Depending on the society, each party can ideologically appeal to a
limited number of groups. The a high level of uncertainty will make the
parties more like to appeal to a large population, since it is difficult
to determine what will be a majority.

D. How competition among parties affects ideologies

Uncertainty creates the arena for different ideologies. The most
effective parties will closely align their ideologies with policy
actions. Therefore, when policies change, ideologies also change with
them. There will be competition amongst the parties for a specific
policy, and the ideologies will change and adapt once the policy is
implemented.

II\. Reliability, Integrity, and Responsibility

Proving that a party's ideology is consistent with its actions in
previous elections, or its statements in the previous campaign, or both.

A.  The Role of Reliability and Responsibility in the Model

"A party is **reliable** if its policy statements at the beginning of an
election period-including those in its pre election campaign-can be used
to make accurate predictions of its behavior (or its statements if it is
not elected) during the period." (104-105)

"A party is responsible if its policies in one period are consistent
with its actions (or statements) in the preceding period, i.e., if it
does not repudiate its former views in formulating its new program."
(105)

B. The necessity for reliability and responsibility in politics

Without reliability and responsibility, voters cannot predict the
behavior of parties. Rational behavior is impossible without some
reliable prediction.

C. How each party's motives cause it to be honest and responsible

Voters in the model only cast votes to change/influence policies. The
ideologies and statements of the party are only used to signal to voters
what policies they desire to implement. And when that party is in
office, voters will judge based upon that policies implemented.

The opposition party is incentivized to be as reliable as possible to
convince voters that they will implement the policies they are
campaigning on.

The incumbent party is never certain to be reelected, so they are forced
to be reliable as well, if they fail to be reliable it will be more
difficult to become re-elected. Say a party in office breaks their
promises, then they lose election. It becomes harder to convince voters
that they should be allowed to enter office, because they have broken
trust.

III\. Ideological Coherence and Stability

A party which is both responsible and reliable will have a coherent and
strict ideology.
