# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: An Insurgent Path to Democracy: Popular Mobilization, Economic Interests and Regime Transition in South Africa and El Salvador
author(s): Elisabeth #Wood
year: #y2001
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Transition #Africa #REGIMES #Democracy #Non-Democracy 
keywords: #Grassroot

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

#### First Summary

Elisabeth Wood: An Insurgent Path to Democracy: Popular Mobilization,
Economic Interests and Regime Transition in South Africa and El Salvador
(October 2001):

Puzzle: Why were the El Salvador and South African cases of
democratization different from other cases? Neither was defeated in war,
nor was democratization imposed on them, nor did the elite want to
transition.

El Salvador and South Africa cases show an insurgent path of regime
transition "from below." Economically and socially marginalized were the
main causal figures unlike most transition cases where they have a more
modest role. Contending elite factors were not the key dramatis personae
like in most Latin American or southern European transitions, but were
distinct classes whose economic interdependence provided a base for
democratization.

These transitions were highly contested because of very high
concentration of productive assets and their owner's resistance to
democratization. Distribution of income was determined by institutions
the state played a greater role in than in liberal economies. Elites
opposed democratization because their livelihoods depended on
state-enforced procedures. For example, in South Africa there was
racially biased public spending combined with strict labor controls, and
in El Salvador there was strict limits on political competition.

Three processes form the "insurgent path": (1) political mobilization
fostered by political & economic exclusion became an insurgency because
of limited reform and repression (foreclosing moderate forms of
protest), (2) ongoing political mobilization led some economic elites to
consider a compromise (costs got too high), and (3) insurgents accepted
political inclusion at cost of a moderate economic agenda -- a
commitment to economic liberalism with little/no change in wealth
distribution.

This article focuses on process #2. Author uses interviews with
political leaders, insurgent leaders, business representatives, and
government officials between 1987-1996 in El Salvador and 1997-1999 in
South Africa, combined w/document analysis and macroeconomic data.

**Transitions to Democracy in Oligarchic Societies:** "Third wave"
analyses emphasize role of elites where moderate elites make deals to
democratize -- this ignores role of economic interests and popular
mobilization. Literature overlooked difference between transitions that
reflect weakness of the regime vis-Ã -vis political opposition, and those
where an excluded group gains access to bargaining table.

Subsequent literature recognized a combination of "from above" and "from
below." But little consensus concerning the conditions under which
popular mobilization may contribute to a transition to democracy. Many
recurring themes in literature: economic interests shape politics;
differences between types of antecedent regimes; emphasis of
working-class actors to extend suffrage; international actors playing a
causal role. This study draws upon these themes. Distinctive nature of
insurgent path (emergence of counter-elite and transformation of elite
interests) reflects oligarchic character of antecedent regime & class
structures.

**Definition:** South Africa & El Salvador = "oligarchic societies": "In
which economic elites rely on nonmarket regulation of labor by the
states for the realization of incomes superior to those possible under
more liberal, market-based arrangements." Dominant labor relations =
repressive.

-   Economic elite: "Those by virtue of their control of the means of
    production attain significant wealth and social status."

-   Regime elites: "Those individuals whose power depends on their
    occupation of state offices."

-   Nonmarket Regulation: "Institutions that coercively discipline
    labor, such as slavery, restrictions on the mobility of labor, and
    gross violations of the liberal rights of free speech and
    association that repress nascent attempts by laborers to organize."

    -   In contrast to liberal societies where labor regulation and
        discipline occur through competition on labor market, property
        rights, and the right to collectively bargain

In oligarchic societies, the reliance of economic elites on nonmarket
regulation of labor by the regime elites leads to an enduring alliance
between the two. Interests of the two elite classes differs: economic
elites prefer to retain the largest share of profits, and regime elites
prefer to capture resources for the state through taxes. Differences can
lead to strain.

"In such societies \[oligarchic\], the exclusivist ideology of economic
and regime elites toward subordinate groups together with coercive labor
practices, the rigid enforcement of class boundaries, and the repression
of mobilization fuels deep resentments that can be mobilized by an
insurgent group based on a claim to common citizenship; moreover,
ongoing repression may contribute to the emergence of its leadership in
an insurgent counter-elite."

**Insurgency, Shifting Elite Interests, and Compromise in El Salvador:**
Coffee production factors were secured by deliberate redefinition of
property rights by fiat and direct coercion -- police forces enforced
new property rights on dispossessed indigenous communities, whose
members were sometimes quasi-bound as labor to the property. By 1920s,
this coalesced into an oligarchy of a few dozen families. Brutally
oppressive response by the state to political mobilization by peasants
in the 1970s led to creation of guerilla forces, particularly the
Farabundo Marti Front for National Liberation (FMLN) in 1980. Insurgent
threat lead to new governing alliance between military and the Christian
Democratic Party (PDC) supported by the United States.

By mid-1980s there was a military stalemate, made clear by FMLN attack
on San Salvador in 1989 that occupied many wealthy neighborhoods. The
civil war reshaped the economic structure of the country, laying
conditions for the compromise -- two economic effects: (1) real per
capita domestic product fell 28% between 1978-1982 then stagnated
between 1982-1989; capital flight also contributed to fall, and (2)
there was a shift in contributing sectors: decline in agriculture
exports, and increase in commercial and service sectors. Insurgents
attacked export crops, and an inflow of remittances caused non-tradeable
goods to soar. See figure 1 below from p 871. Note that these trends
were not caused by modernization (replacement of agriculture by
manufacturing), nor was it caused by a crash in demand for Coffee as
neighboring countries prospered during war years -- see table 1 below
from p 872.

Economic changes resulted in economic elites drawing income from new
sectors, and the prospect for increased investments through free trade
agreements incentivized a resolution to the war otherwise Salvadoran
elites would lose out to neighboring countries. However, despite
counterinsurgency reforms, collaboration between hard-liner oligarchic
elements and military continued. Roberto D'Aubuisson, a wealthy exile in
Miami, helped lead violence and intimidation against political
mobilization while founding the National Republican Alliance Party
(ARENA). There formed a rift between the PDC and ARENA, the military
supported PDC, while the economic elite supported ARENA. After a PDC
victory in 1985, ARENA leaders expanded electoral base to middle-class
voters and small businessmen. In September 1985, Alfredo Cristiani
replaced D'Aubuisson as the leader of ARENA, signaling a shift from the
hard-liners.

Cristiani's faction was more tolerant of democratic norms and had
diverse economic interests (not just coffee plantations), lessening a
reliance on coercive labor practices. With the help of a US think-tank,
ARENA developed a set of neoliberal policies, and this appealed to
voters, electing Cristiani president in 1989. After the FMLN attack on
San Salvador, negotiation to end the war began under UN mediation and a
final peace was signed in January 16, 1992. FMLN became a political
party, and some FMLN members would join a civilian police force, and
ex-combatants (and civilian supporters) would have a chance to buy land.
This led to the first inclusive election in 1994 where ARENA won the
presidency, but FMLN won 25% of vote.

Had the shift in elite economic interests not taken place, it is
unlikely that negotiations of peace settlement would have been
acceptable to ARENA negotiators. Compromise was a recognition of
transformed relations in countryside. Other factors like the murder of 6
Jesuit priests by the government during the FMLN's 1989 offensive
resulted in congressional opposition to US funding of Salvadoran
military.

**Insurgency, the Suspension of Investment, and Compromise in South
Africa:** Labor repressive institutions dating from colonial period
ensured ample and acquiescent labor force. Mineworker wages did not rise
in real terms from 1911-1969 despite increases in productivity. As
manufacturing expanded, more African could work and live in restricted
areas, but under strict legal regulations. There was a long-enduring
alliance between Afrikaners and English-speaking, non-Afrikaners -- the
all-white National Party ruled w/o interruption from 1948-1990s. The
state promoted Afrikaner interests at the expense of English interests
-- thus the English business elite interests converged with the
interests of white labor and expanding Afrikaner business group on
maintaining segregation, illegality of African trade unions, and
disenfranchising non-white adults.

In 1960, troops killed protestors and banned the African National
Congress (ANC) -- then in 1973, strikes occurred in Durban and unionists
were able to form unions in federations in the 1970s. Political
mobilization in townships surged, and after the killing of school
children in 1976, protests lasted more than a year and spread to more
than 100 urban areas.

In response, conservative modernization took the forms of reforming
labor market and pass law regulations and promotion of non-white
representation in racially segregated institutions. Changes to labor,
influx controls, governance and other restrictions on African workers
were made at recommendations of Weihahn and Riekert Commissions
beginning in 1979. Unions grew explosively and became militant,
eventually founding the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU)
in 1985. With the organization of United Democratic Front, civic
organizations grew militant as well, specially after 1983 constitution
reaffirmed exclusion of Africans from citizenship

With the failure of modernizations, business confidence declined -- with
the exception of booming prices of gold in 1979-1981, there was a
decline in investment. Figure 2 below from p 877 shows the ratio of
private gross domestic investment over capital stock for annual and
business cycle averaged data (you can see the responses to political
events). South Africa Reserve Bank Analysis attribute the decline
directly to political factors. Econometric analysis of South Africa
investment confirms emphasis on political unrest as determinant of
investment.

Figure 3 below from p 878 shows an alternative view of declining
investor confidence -- reduction and redirection of foreign investment
into South Africa.

Sustained insurgency also shaped the movement of other economic
variables like exchange rate and cost of capital. As a result, the value
of the rand declined from 34% from 1983-1985. Cost of capital increased
in mid-1908s, and by mid-1980s, the mobilization against apartheid was
able to remove the credit subsidies enjoyed by investors. International
sanctions further contributed to the suspension of investment and fall
in value of the rand. The sanctions were a response to the domestic
dynamic of mobilization and repression (therefore not exogenous says the
author).

In contrast to El Salvador where elite interest in sectors changed, in
the South African case political mobilization led to a more general
threat on all wealth holders. Frustrated by the government's vacillation
between attempts to cultivate moderate black opposition through limited
reforms and increasing repression, business representatives took an
interest into a range of initiatives that put pressure on state elites
to reform. For example, business organizations started a campaign for
reform in January 1985. Then, after P.W. Botha's speech on August 15,
1985, business organizations called for the release of Nelson Mandela
and negotiations with the ANC. In 1986, the Federated Chamber of
Industries called for universal right to own property, South African
citizenship, and secret balloting. By late 1980s, many business
executives and nearly all business organizations wanted liberal reform
and nonracial democracy.

Under the weight of pressure of economic downturn, the coalition of
white labor, Afrikaner business, and civil service began to collapse in
early 1980s. The National Party also faced troubles -- by 1985 regime
officials were in conversation with Mandela, and F.W. de Klerk was
elected president who then released Mandela, unbanned the ANC, and made
negotiation possible. The National Party negotiated in the shadow of a
certain ANC victory in nonracial elections. Property rights were
protected, but the National Party failed to ensure white minority
interests through ethnically-based schemes.

**Conclusion:** Along the insurgency paths, insurgency was sustained
long enough to create structural conditions for conflict resolution:
constituted an insurgent counter-elite with whom negotiations proved
necessary and the insurgency directly threatened the interests and
opportunities of economic elites. Economic elites came to believe that
their interests would be better secured by a transition to democracy and
pressed for negotiation with insurgent forces. Additionally,
international forces put pressure on negotiation, and the fall of
Communist regimes in Eastern Europe made socialist policies unlikely and
difficult to justify.

The argument here is similar to Collier's path of
"destabilization/extrication" where working-class unrest destabilizes
authoritarian regimes, starting the process of transition, but the
causal role played by subordinate social actors in the El Salvador and
South African transitions was greater -- the insurgent counter-elite sat
at the bargaining table but no other party was remotely as important to
the success of the resulting agreement.

Implications of this argument for regime transition: (1) to explain the
complex and evolving alliances, we need to distinguish between the
political elites, regime elites, economic elites, leaders of
labor/popular movements, and counterinsurgent elites, (2) distinct forms
of mobilization pose different threats to distinct regimes, (3) elite
economic interests are endogenous to the trajectory of the conflict, and
(4) where civil conflict is structured by class, the economic
interdependence of the contending parties may contribute to compromise
in contrast to civil wars where the parties are economically independent
as when insurgents control diamonds or cocaine.


#### Second Summary

IV: insurgency

DV: regime type/compromise

Nutshell: (I think) modernization isn't the only way to bring about
democratization (it didn't occur in the traditional sense in El
Salvador). Insurgency and the conditions it causes can pressure
(oligarchic/economic) elites so much that the insurgents have to be
negotiated with and democracy may actually be better.

Ok so this conclusion paragraph says the whole thing:

Why then did the elites of these oligarchic societies abandon their
implacable

opposition to democratic rule and negotiate a transition to democracy

with the insurgent counterelite? Along the insurgent path to democracy

described here, insurgency was sustained long enough to create the
structural

conditions for the resolution of conflict: It constituted an insurgent
counterelite

with whom negotiations proved necessary and it directly threatened the

interests and opportunities of economic elites (via labor mobilization
in

South Africa and peasant insurrection in El Salvador) such that they
came to

judge the foreseeable returns to continued recalcitrance as less than
the

returns to compromise with the insurgents. Economic elites in both
countries

came to believe that their interests would be better secured under a
transition

to democracy by a combination of the discipline of labor offered by
glutted

labor markets, the discipline of economic policy promised by the threat
of

capital flight in liberalized economies, and constitutional assurances
of the

security of their property. As a result, economic elites pressed for
negotiation

with insurgent forces. As in many countries, in both South Africa and El
Salvador,

once negotiations were underway, the insurgent counterelite deployed

renewed political mobilization whenever the process faltered, an ongoing

reminder of insurgent capacity to reimpose costs on economic and regime

elites.

The author argues: El Salvador and South Africa show how the insurgent
path to democracy (mobilization from below) impels some regime
transitions.

-   Sustained mobilization by poor/working class transformed key
    interests of econ elites -\> pressured states to compromise

-   The route to democracy was negotiated by reps of the regime and the
    insurgent counterelite opposition (which represented the excluded,
    low income people)

3 processes comprise the insurgent path to democracy in these 2
countries

-   Political mobilization came from political/econ exclusion. Led to
    insurgency as reforms and repression made less serious forms of
    protest untenable

-   The ongoing political mobilization -\> some econ elites to consider
    compromise because costs were high and democracy might be better

-   The political bargains supporting the insurgent transitions -\>
    insurgents accepting political inclusion but moderation of their
    econ agendas

Oligarchic elites involved in both cases, they were being hurt
financially
