# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Endogenous Democratization 
author(s): Carles #Boix and Susan #Stokes
year: #y2003
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Democracy #REGIMES #Transition #Modernization #Development 
keywords: #Endogenous 

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary




Carles Boix, and Susan Stokes: Endogenous Democratization (July 2003):

\[This article has many tables and figures; please excuse the length of
my summary\]

Boix and Stokes challenge Przeworski and Limongi's (P&L) refutation of
endogenous democratization on both theoretical and empirical grounds.
Theoretically, to sustain the distinction between endogenous and
exogenous democratization, you would need a theory where development
induces actors in democracies to sustain the system, but does not induce
actors in dictatorships to change to a democracy (the authors argue that
P&L do not provide this theory). Empirically, the authors replicate and
reexamine P&L's results in three ways. One, development in poor and
middle-income countries increases the probability for democracy
transitions for both endogenous and exogenous reasons (development
increases the probability of transition to democracy and democracy
sustaining itself). Two, they extend the sample selection to more
observations starting in the mid-19^th^ century. Three, they use
additional theoretical controls in their model.

**The Theory:** If we sustain the theory that development makes
democracies more stable, but does not induce dictatorships to
democratize, then the "initial regime condition" of the theory matters.
*P&L 's initial regime is one of poorly institutionalized democracy in
danger of reverting to a dictatorship.* For this theory, P&L require 2
"stories" \[theories?\]: (1) assumption that actors in a democracy
become increasingly likely to stick with it as their economy grows, and
(2) assumption that actors in a dictatorship are not more likely to
choose democracy as their economy grows. See figure 1 below for a
visualization (p 520) -- in it the probability of democratic breakdown
(PDA) is negatively correlated with per capita income, while the
probability of democratic transition (PAD) is independent. The authors
find that in a democracy, income growth increases democratic stability.
In a dictatorship economic growth increases the incentives for the
ruling faction to democratize. Therefore, P&L's "story" actually
predicts that development will cause democracy under the initial
conditions of both democracy and dictatorship, hence development is both
an endogenous and exogenous cause of democracy.

**The Facts:** Looking at P&L's analysis, the authors **argue** that
their findings fail 3 tests: (1) "they observe few transitions to
democracy at high levels of income and infer that income does not cause
transitions, whereas this observation is in fact consistent with
endogenous democratization," (2) sample selection bias, and (3) omitted
variable bias.

**Robustness Problem 1: Dwindling Numbers:** Figure 2 below (taken from
P&L by the authors, p 523) shows the PAD at certain income levels. But,
we should be cautious of PADs at high development, to see why, consider
the following. Assume P&L's modernization theory is correct. Development
happens, incomes go up, and as a result, dictatorships transition to
democracy, and as countries get richer, democracy is more likely to
stick. In this scenario, the world gets rich and more democratic, and
when the world is rich, the number of dictatorships dwindle. *Because
the number of dictatorships is small, their PAD is also small, therefore
we **should not** draw inferences about the PAD.* The number is so
small, so small variations would cause large changes in our PAD
estimates.

There may be so few dictatorships left at high levels of income
precisely because development at lower levels of income already turned
them into a democracy. The premise of "vacuous" endogenous modernization
is only so if you accept that countries can be considered to undergo
development at high levels of income. The anomaly then becomes not the
small number of dictatorships that become rich and then democratized,
but rather that dictatorships survived at all given earlier development.
See table 1 below (from p 525) for observations of this.


The authors then retest P&L's probit analysis with per capita income
plus a full set of control variables: growth rate, chief executive
turnover rate, religious fragmentation index, % Catholic, Protestant,
and Muslim, former colony or not, \# of previous democratic breakdowns,
and proportion of democracies in the world each year. See table 2 below
(p 526) for results: per capita income is statistically significant --
PDA declines with per capita income & dictatorship stability also
declines w/per capita income. In short, development increases PAD.
Figure 3 simulates table 2's results, holding all other variables
constant, it plots the PAD as per capita income increases. PDA declines
steeply with income, while PAD rises moderately.

**Robustness Problem 2: Sample Selection:** "A complete theory of
democratization cannot be drawn w/o exploring the dynamics that led to
the skewed distribution (of table 3 below) and w/o accounting for the
democratization dynamics of the high-income countries." Therefore, the
sample needs to be pushed back in time before democracies existed.
Growth patterns are not randomly distributed either and uniformly low
across all countries before 1800. Only after early 19^th^ century that
growth kicked off. To refute the endogenous theory of democratization,
one must show that democratization did not follow development amount the
nations that took off in the 19^th^ century.

The authors combine P&L's data with data on political regimes from 1800
to 1949. The new data set codes countries as democracies if they meet 3
conditions: free and competitive elections, executive accountability
(through elections or parliamentary regimes), and at least 50% of males
are enfranchised. The authors first run models on two different periods:
1950-90 and 1850-1949 (table 4 below on p 530).

Postwar (model 1) results are similar to results in table 2: per capita
income slightly increases PAD and substantially reduces PDA. However,
mid-19^th^ century until WW2 (model 2), the reverse is true. Per capita
income has a strong positive, and significant effect on PAD and income
growth does not reduce PDA. Model 3 is the whole sample. PAD is
represented in figure 4a below, and PDA in 4b (on p 532). In short,
democratization is a process endogenous to development, but less salient
in post-1950 sample. "Countries that were economically developed by 1950
were already democratic by that time. And most countries that were not
developed by 1950 either did not develop enough to make their way into
democracy in the following decades or were prevented from democratizing
by some exogenous variable (e.g., Soviet domination)."

Table 5 below (p 533) "reports a spline function in which we estimate
how transition dynamics change at low, medium, and high levels of
development.

**Robustness Problem 3: Omitted Variables:** In which the authors
present theoretically independent variables they P&L may have omitted
from their analysis. Wealth, mobility of capital, international forces
all could impact dictatorship survivability. In table 6 below (p 536),
the authors exclude all countries under Soviet control (model 2) and
Soviet-dominated and oil-rich countries (model 3). The results show that
when controlling for exogenous factors of international politics and
resource endowments, development increases PAD. Figure 5 is a
visualization of these results.

**Endogenous Growth:** "Development itself may be endogenous to the type
of political regime, that is, it may partly depend on the presence of
democratic institutions." If true, we would see higher proportions of
democracies among developed countries precisely because the introduction
of democratic procedures caused development to begin with. Theoretical
literature on the impact of democratic institutions on growth is split.

**Equality, Development, and Democracy:** "Income equality means that
the redistributive scheme that would win democratic support would
deprive the rich of less income than the one voters would support if
income distribution were highly unequal -- therefore the rich should be
more willing to countenance democratization." Capitalists in rich
dictatorships would rather have democracy than capitalists in poor
dictatorships, just as rich capitalists in democracies would rather have
continued democracy than capitalists in poor democracies. Data says
democracy is caused not by income per se, but by income equality. Figure
6 below (p 541) shows the proportion of democratic regimes by per capita
income in 3 periods.

Data on income inequality is "practically nonexistent" pre-WW2, so they
use 2 proxy indicators: (1) distribution of agricultural property, and
(2) quality of human capital (education). Table 7 below (p 542) shows
the results of their model. Model 1 = effects of the per capita income
alone on transitions and stability. Model 2 adds 1^st^ proxy variable.
Model 3 adds both proxies. Education cuts the impact of per capita
income on democratic stability by half. Distribution of farms increases
democratic transitions and stability.

In sum, per capita income increases in countries where incomes are
becoming more equal. Income equality causes countries to democratize and
sustain democracy.

**Conclusions:** Question is not why development fails to increase the
chances of a transition to democracy, instead there are three new
questions: (1) why did the income threshold for democratization increase
after 1950? (2) Why were early-industrializing despots more vulnerable
to economic development than late-industrializing counterparts? And (3)
Why pre-WW2 was the main contribution of economic growth was to bring
democracy about, and post-WW2 to protect democracy once it existed?

"Economic development both causes democracy and sustains it. Yet a full
answer to why this is so requires us to understand the hidden mechanisms
and consequences of economic development.

Pages 545-549 have their appendix which outlines their algebra and game
theory.
