# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Neopatrimonial regimes and political transitions in Africa
author(s): Michael #Bratton and Nicolas #Van_de_Walle
year: #y1994 
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #REGIMES #Neopatrimonial #Transition #Democracy #Non-Democracy  
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary




**Neopatrimonial regimes and political transitions in Africa.** BraTton
& Van De Walle 1994

**[Main questions:]{.underline}** Why do some regimes undergo
transitions from authoritarian rule while others do not? Are there
different paths of transition? Why do some transitions occasionally
result in democracy but others fall short? Why, in Africa, are
transitions to democracy generally problematic?

**[Main argument]{.underline}**: Contemporary political changes are
conditioned by mechanisms of rule embedded in the current regime.
Institutional characteristics of the preexisting political structure has
an impact **[on the dynamic of the transition, and to a lesser extent on
its outcomes.]{.underline}**

**Regime type and political transition -- lit. review**

[Karen Remmer:]{.underline} inclusionary democracies tend to collapse as
a result of intrigue among the political elite, whereas exclusionary
democracies are more likely to succumb to pressure from below. Once
inclusionary regimes have held power, the reimposition of an
exclusionary regime requires heavy doses of state coercion.

[Huntington]{.underline}\'s: finds little overall relationship between
the nature of the incumbent authoritarian regime and the pattern of
political transition. Nevertheless, leaders of one-party and military
regimes are somewhat more likely than personal dictators to engage the
opposition in a negotiated transfer of power. Personalistic regimes are
more susceptible than other regime types to collapse in the face of
popular protest. dictatorial leaders usually refuse to give up power
voluntarily and try to stay in office as long as they can.

[Guillermo O\'Donnell and Philippe Schmitter]{.underline}: contingent
approach - formerly cohesive social classes and political organizations
tend to splinter in the heat of political combat, making it impossible
to deduce alignments and actions of any protagonist. Political outcomes
are driven by the short-term calculations and the immediate reactions of
strategic actors to unfolding events (and not by preexisting
constellations in political institutions)

-   Authors of this article argued that the contingent approach in
    mainly comes from the comparison of more or less similar regimes of
    Europe and Latin America while Africa is different.

[African political regimes are distinctly noncorporatist]{.underline}.
African leaders have rarely used bureaucratic formulas to construct
authoritative institutions or granted subsidiary spheres of influence to
occupational interest groups within civil society. Contemporary African
regimes do not display the formal governing coalitions between organized
state and social/class interests or the collective bargaining over core
public policies that characterize corporatism.

[Distinctive institutional hallmark of African regimes is
neopatrimonialism]{.underline}: Chief executive maintains authority
through personal patronage, rather than through ideology or law.

Relationships of loyalty and dependence pervade a formal political and
administrative system. Leaders occupy bureaucratic offices less to
perform public service than to acquire personal wealth and status. In
return for material rewards, "clients" mobilize political support and
refer all decisions upward as a mark of deference to patrons

-   All of those exists in many states but in Africa those are the core
    features of the political system

**Comparing regimes and transitions**

[Model of democratization for Europe and Latin America]{.underline}: The
transition begins when a moderate faction within the state elite
recognizes that social peace and economic development alone cannot
legitimate an authoritarian regime. They Promote improved guarantees of
civil and political rights and later conceding the convocation of free
and fair elections. The greatest threat is military coup. In order to
prevent it government and opposition leaders meet behind the scenes to
forge a compromise \"pact\" to guarantee the vital interests of major
elite player

**Transitions in neopatrimonial regimes:**

1\. [Originate in social protest]{.underline} (mainly because of
shrinking economic opportunities and exclusionary patterns of reward).

When public resources dwindle to the point where the incumbent
government can no longer pay civil servants, the latter join the
anti-regime protesters in the streets. Government may resort to coercion
which further undermines legitimacy of the regime. The real problems
rise when government cannot pay the military.

In most of the analyzed cases (16 out of 21) protests start bottom-up.
Neopatrimonial regimes resist the process as long as they can. Political
struggle begins as the result of the emergence of a new elite that
depressed and previously leaderless social group

2\. [Neopatrimonial elites fracture over access to
patronage]{.underline}.

Since elites completely dependent on their resources and status from the
dictator they won't break ranks. But the nature of the regimen will
always create some leaders that were elites once but then were banned
from the in-group and sometimes even from the country. Therefore,
neopatrimonialism tend to create simultaneously a defensively cohesive
state elite and a potential pool of alternative leaders outside of the
state .

3\. [Elite political pacts are unlikely in neopatrimonial
regimes]{.underline}.

First, incumbent and opposition leaders are usually so polarized as a
result of winner-take-all power struggles that there is slim possibility
that moderate factions from either side can negotiate an agreement.

Pacts are only likely where well-developed institutions-for example, the
military on the government side or political parties on the opposition
side-present cohesive bargaining positions and demonstrate credible
political clout.

4\. [In neopatrimonial regimes, political transitions are struggles to
establish legal rules]{.underline}.

Neopatrimonial leaders enjoy sweeping discretion in making public
decisions so there is no established rule of law. Opposition often use
the call for rule of law for its advantage. If opposition gained power
it usually created internal struggle regarding the extent of transition.
Old guard what to limit the transition in order to be able to benefit
from the patronage system.

5\. [During transitions from neopatrimonial regimes, middle-class
elements align with the opposition.]{.underline}

Because neopatrimonial regimes are embedded in pre-capitalist societies,
we should expect a different transition scenario (compared to capitalist
societies). State has actively undermined capitalist forms of
accumulation. Property rights are imperfectly respected

Rather than regarding the incumbent regime as the protector of property
rights, private capital opposes the use of the state machinery by a
bureaucratic bourgeoisie to appropriate property for itself. This
explains the tendency of emergent middle classes in Africa to side with
the democratic opposition

**Variations in neopatrimonial transitions in Africa**

-   Authors treat neopatrimonial rule as a master concept that embraces
    a variety of subsidiary regime variants. They follows Dahl's
    classification with two dimensions: the extent of competition (or
    contestation) and the degree of political participation (or
    inclusion).

1\. African regimes have varied in the extent to which members of the
political system are allowed to compete over elected positions or public
policy. At one extreme, opposition parties have formed and even been
allowed into the legislature in a small number of countries. At the
other extreme, some regimes have banned any contestation of the policies
formulated by an inner group of politicians.

2\. African regimes have varied in the degree of political participation
allowed, most obviously, through the timing and frequency of legislative
and executive elections. Postcolonial African regimes that have held
elections have rarely limited the franchise.

-   Based on Dahl's dimension they derive six regime variants for Africa
    (see figure 1). 

Four of these regime variants are consistent with personal rule and can
be regarded as varieties of neopatrimonialism: personal dictatorship,
military oligarchy, and plebiscitary and competitive one-party system.

Figure 1. Regime Variants in Africa

Figure 2: African countries by Regime Variant

**Personal dictatorship**

-   Quintessence of neopatrimonialism, highly exclusionary. Institutions
    of participation exist in name only and cannot check the absolute
    powers of the chief executive. No political competition what so
    ever. President for life.

-   Dictator rules by controlling the flow of pub rewards to a narrow
    entourage of familial, ethnic, or factional clients. He takes
    exclusive charge of policy-making (rather than relying on
    technocratic planning) and implements instructions through personal
    emissaries (rather than formal institutions)

[Transition in personal dictatorship]{.underline}:

-   Driven by forces outside.

-   Opportunity for regime change occurs only with the death,
    deposition, or flight of the strongman, which becomes the primary
    objective of the opposition throughout the transition.

-   The willingness of personal dictators to step down often depends on
    whether they fear prosecution for their egregious abuse of state
    powers and privileges. As the result dictator cling to the
    protection of the office and try to control transition.

-   The absence of institutional mechanisms for political competition
    creates several consequences:

protagonists find difficulty in reaching a compromise formula to end the
regime. The opposition would be unorganized and lacking traditions of
participatory politics. Church may emerge as a primary actor in the
transition. All of this virtually eliminate the chances for transition
and consolidation of democratic order.

**Plebiscitary one-party system**

-   More inclusionary.

-   Voters are mobilized and controlled through the mechanism of
    one-party plebiscites (one candidate from the official party appears
    on the ballot).

-   Between elections, the regime employs a party machine to distribute
    patronage to a wider array of economic and regional interests.

[Transition in plebiscitary one-party system]{.underline}

-   National conferences are the distinctive institution and watershed
    event of the transition. Such conferences are appealing to both
    opposition and ruling elite. Rulers believe that they can turn such
    events to their advantage, just as they have always done. For
    opposition, such events appeal because usually they state right away
    that the reform of the rules of the game is a prerequisite for
    political change. And because participatory structures are strong
    enough that the regime is incapable of completely disregarding or
    repressing calls for a national conference. In addition, opposition,
    usually inexperienced and unorganized so such convention may hide
    their weakness.

-   Consequently, leaders and oppositions thus proceed toward a national
    conference with very different expectations. The former see it as a
    harmless participatory ritual that will provide the regime with a
    much needed boost, whereas the latter see it as the first step in a
    democratic takeover. The result is hard to predict because it
    depends on the participants But in many cases such events ends in
    favor of opposition.

**Military oligarchy**

-   Usually as a result of coup

-   Decisions are made by a narrow elite behind closed doors.

-   Decisions are made collectively by a junta, committee, or cabinet
    that may include civilian advisers and technocrats in addition to
    military officers.

-   There are no elections of any kind because most militaries harbor a
    deep distrust of politics.

-   Military may promise to return to civilian control after they fix
    the system

[Transition in Military oligarchy]{.underline}

-   Usually as result of crisis which followed by a crisis of
    legitimacy.

-   Transitions from above are most likely. Because of military\'s near
    monopoly on the means of coercion they care less about popular
    support.

-   Military usually mange the transition. Military may initiate
    [managed]{.underline} transitions either without great sincerity or
    in response to popular protest and pressures.

-   Since military suppressed opposition the transition unfolds with
    little or no organized opposition powerful enough to contest the
    regime\'s timetable (regarding return to civilian control). This
    managed transition does have the advantage of reducing uncertainty
    and imposing on the state a kind of accountability that weak social
    actors may find advantageous.

-   For military oligarchs, the biggest challenge is the gradual
    introduction of political participation. 

**Competitive one-party system**

-   As inclusive as the plebiscitary variant but also somewhat more
    competitive

limited competition at the mass level. Elections in these systems allow
for two or

more candidates in party primaries or parliamentary elections.
Candidates from a single official party with an established policy
platform

often headed by nationalist founding father

-   In some cases, the original ruler has previously engineered a smooth
    but nondemocratic leadership transition to a hand-picked successor.

-   Leadership tolerates a degree of pluralism, which allows for
    opposition to the government on the fringes of the single party, in
    the press, and in various civic associations, which are strong by
    African standards.

[Transition in Competitive one-party system]{.underline}

-   Vulnerable to collapse due to economic crisis

-   Political transition is sparked by an upsurge of popular sentiment
    against the regime, which then causes stress in the elite coalition

-   The pluralistic mechanisms that promoted elite accommodation and
    compromise now hasten the transition and at the same time channel
    it.

-   Opposition want to move straight forward to election. They demand
    only minor adjustments to the rules of participation and competition
    to ensure that elections are free and fair.

The acceptance of this demand depends on whether the leaders are first-
or second-generation leaders.

-   First generation are more confident in their public support and in
    their political machinery so they accept the demand.

-   Second generation lacks the historical legitimacy and
    well-established political base. Therefore, they are less willing to
    risk. So, they prevaricate and delay.

<!-- -->

-   Despite these obstacles, the prospects for a democratic process are
    greater for transitions from competitive one-party regimes than from
    other types of Neopatrimonial regime. They already have
    institutional foundation.

**Multiparty polyarchies** display relatively high levels of both
participation and competition and have already completed a democratic
political transition.

**Settler oligarchies** approximate exclusionary democracy. In these
regimes, the dominant racial group uses the instruments of law to deny
political rights to ethnic majorities, usually through a restrictive
franchise and emergency legislation. But they have competition within
their own ranks.

**Conclusions and implications**

Institutional characteristics of the preexisting political structure has
an impact **[on the dynamic of the transition, and to a lesser extent on
its outcomes.]{.underline}**

[Nevertheless, they can say something about the outcome
also:]{.underline}

-   Consolidated democracy is much less likely to eventuate from the
    abrupt collapse of a personal dictatorship than from the gradual
    reform of a competitive one-party system

-   The outcomes of transitions from military oligarchies and
    plebiscitary regimes are racked by cross-pressures deriving from a
    mixed institutional heritage. So we can predict dynamics of those
    transitions but not the outcomes.

-   Transitions from dictatorial and plebiscitary regimes generate
    unregulated political conflict. It is because in both regime
    variants, political contestation is outlawed rather than channeled
    through political institutions.

-   Within Africa the prospects for democracy are better in transitions
    from settler oligarchies than from all variants of neopatrimonial
    regimes (Because in settler oligarchies we have pluralistic
    political competition).

-   Democracy is possible only in the presence of a set of political
    institutions that allows protagonists to propose, negotiate, and win
    popular acceptance for political accommodations. (Dah...)
