# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: The Political Foundations of Democracy and Rule of Law
author(s): Weingast
year: #y1997
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Transition #Elites #REGIMES #Democracy 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

**The Political Foundations of Democracy and Rule of Law, WEINGAST
1997**

**Summery**

The author argues that existing studies which attempted to unpack the
causation of transition to democracy and democratic stability, missing
coordination problems among elites and citizens. Scholar like Putnam
argued that the role of social trust between citizens produce democratic
stability but not fully considering the role of elites while Prrzeworski
focuses on the interaction of institutions and elite incentives but not
fully considering role of citizens. Weingast, by introducing game
theoretic model and historical evidences, argues that coordination of
players more accurately explains the questions.

**Questions**

1\) The absence of consensus about the role of interests and values in
democratic stability.

2\) Why divided societies cause so much difficulty for democratic
stability?

3\) Elite pacts, agreements among competing elites that initiate a
transition to democracy. No widely accepted approach explains precisely
what problem pacts solve or what distinguishes successful from failing
pacts.

**Sovereign-Constituency Transgression Game (Asymmetric Equilibrium)**

First, the sovereign (S) need not transgress against all citizens (A and
B) simultaneously. Second, transgressions have distributional
implications: When the sovereign transgresses against one group, he
shares some of the benefits with the other group in exchange for their
support. For example, violating one group\'s right of representation may
allow the other a greater share of legislative benefits.

Specifically, S faces two groups of citizens, A and B; he must retain
the support of at least one group in order to retain power. The sequence
of action is shown in Figure 3. S moves first and may choose to attempt
to transgress against both A and B, against A alone, against B alone, or
against neither. After S moves, A and B move simultaneously. Each may
choose acquiesce or challenge. If both A and B challenge, then the
sovereign is deposed, and any transgression attempted by the sovereign
is rebuffed. If only one group of citizens challenges S, then the
challenge fails, and any attempted transgression succeeds. If both A and
B acquiesce, then any attempted transgression succeeds. The payoffs from
this game are given in Figure 4.

Social surplus is maximized when no transgressions or challenges are
attempted, yielding 2, 8, and 8, respectively. Power is valuable to the
sovereign, and he loses 2 if he is deposed. A successful transgression
nets a total of 3. When S successfully transgresses against one group,
he keeps 2 of the 3 and shares 1 with the other group. If S transgresses
against both, then he keeps 6. A transgression against either group
destroys half of all confiscated surplus, costing the victim a total of
6. Challenging costs each challenger 1 regardless of whether it succeed.
After the repeated games, each player ends up this equilibrium. The
model shows the most natural equilibrium of the game is coordination
failure: Citizens are unlikely to achieve coordination in a wholly
decentralized manner. Typically, differential circumstances imply there
is no natural focal solution to their problem

S: If either A or B has ever acquiesced to a transgression, transgress
against both A and B. Otherwise, do not transgress.

A: If B has challenged every previous transgression by S, then challenge
if S transgresses and acquiesce otherwise. If B has acquiesced to a
previous transgression by S, acquiesce in every period.

B: If A has challenged every previous transgression by S, then challenge
if S transgresses and acquiesce otherwise. If A has acquiesced to a
previous transgression by S, acquiesce in every period.

**Conclusion**

In the asymmetric equilibrium, the sovereign gains the support of some
citizens while transgressing against others. The equilibrium\'s
stability, preventing support for the universalistic standards of a
horizontal, democratic society. The model\'s asymmetric, nondemocratic
equilibrium is stable in part because

one of the two groups gains by subjugating the other. Because this is an
equilibrium, something outside the

model must dislodge it. Economic crisis may imply that the status quo
can no longer be sustained; the state may become mired in an
unresolvable civil war; or a new foreign threat may provide an incentive
for groups to forgo their previous differences.

If citizens were willing to punish officials of all political
stripes-for violating democratic procedures, then rival parties would be
less likely to violate those procedures and hence, by the formula for
compliance, so too would incumbents. Two means of constructing limits
are elite pacts and the writing of a constitution. Unfortunately, a
society cannot establish a coordination device at just any time. When
the state and its supporters benefit from transgressions against other
citizens, this pattern is a stable equilibrium. Breaking

this equilibrium is difficult and requires something exogenous to the
model.

It is elites who choose whether to construct pacts, initiate
democratization, violate citizen rights, and implement public policies.
Mass behavior is relevant to elite choices because it determines part of
elite incentives. Citizen values and elite interests are thus
complementary aspects of democratic stability. Weingast explains the
democratic stability, coordination problems of ethnically fragmented
societies and elite pact from the calculation of each player and
coordination games.

**My thought**

1)  It is understandable that democracy would not come from the
    asymmetric equilibrium of sovereign-citizen game, and the author
    raises the necessity of something external shock such as economic
    crisis. The author did not give a clear explanation for how such
    external shock would produce the different trajectories and rules in
    the game.

2)  Relating to 1, How elites are bound to introduce democratic inducing
    devices such as constitution and elite pacts, he explained, kind of,
    by using another small game theoretic model and historical evidences
    (Missouri Compromise, Glorious Revolution). However, particularly,
    for constitution part, further explanation is needed.
