# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: The Fourth Wave of Democracy and Dictatorship: Noncooperative Transitions in the Postcommunist World
author(s): Michael #McFaul
year: #y2002 
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Transition #Democracy #Non-Democracy #REGIMES 
keywords: #Waves 

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

The Fourth Wave of Democracy and Dictatorship: Noncooperative
Transitions in the Postcommunist World (2002)

Michael McFaul

The article seeks to explain regime change in the post communist world.
It is challenging the central claim in previous literature. That claim
is that "the mode of transition influence the resulting regime
type."(213) Democracy emerges through specific transitional moments
where the balance of power is uncertain. (This is challenging Rustow)
inherently in this claim is the fact that ideas, norms, and beliefs play
little role. It is really about power sharing, rather than ideas.

This pattern doesn't occur in the post communist transitions. Rather
than power uncertainty, it was in situations where power was most
unevenly distributed that had the transitions away from communism.

"And hence institutions of power sharing or checks and balances did not
result from compromises between the ancien regime and democratic
challengers but rather emerged only if the hegemonic democrats chose to
implement them"(214)

And in countries where autocratic institutions maintained authority,
dictatorships retained control.

I.  *Cooperative Approaches to Regime Change*

Institutions don't make democracies, people do. The people are
influenced by structural forces, but when explaining how similar
institutions structures diverge, look at the people.(Carl Note, seems
like a tautology)

Transitiologists, therefore have a different theory than the
structuralists. The existing regime change literature focuses
non-structural forces that create regime change. They are identifying
causal relationships between the "mode of transition and the type of
democracy". (216) They are looking at critical juncture, and specific
types of elites. Often the mechanism is strategic decision making
amongst the actors. On examples is, "democracy by imposition-a path in
which the soft liners from the ancien regime set the terms of
transition."(216)

In general; compromises, negotiations, and agreements, is how democracy
is made. Therefore, democratic transitions fall apart when things occur
that make negotiations difficult. Chiefly, when the masses or radical
elites get involved.

"Moderate, evolutionary processes are considered good for democratic
emergence; radical revolutionary processes are considered bad"(219)

*II. Noncooperative Model of Transition*

The above theory doesn't really work for the post-communist transitions.
Rather than slow deliberative compromises reaching democracy, the most
radical transitions have produced the most stable democracies. Rather
than elites, Mass actors were the driving forces behind democracy. In
general, democracy emerged not from elites making compromises, but
rather from mass revolutionary movements. This is counter to the theory.

Additionally, in countries that had relatively equal distribution of
power amongst elites had the most difficult transitions. The result was
authoritarian government, or sometimes civil war.

Therefore; "If the powerful believed in democratic principles, then they
imposed democratic institutions. But if they believed in autocratic
principles, then they imposed autocratic institution"(224)

*III. Causal Paths of Postcommunist Regime change*

The author believes that this , "noncooperative model" actually is a
better model for all post communist regime transitions. It resembles a
totally different set of causal paths. **Power** and **ideas** take
center stage, replacing negotiation and cooperation. When power favors
democracy, we get democracy. When power favors authoritarian we get
authoritarian. BUT when power is evenly shared, the outcomes are very
uncertain.

Power from Below: Hegemonic Democrats

When Balance of power favors challengers. In this case the democratic
elite had large amount of popular support and mobilization. They then
imposed their will on the previous elites and created democracy. (The
author then elaborates on how this happened in Poland, Hungary, and
Czechoslovakia) in all of these states, actors committed to democratic
ideas, and used their hegemonic power to impose it.

Imposition from Above: Hegemonic Autocrats

When the Balance of Power favors the ancien regime, then the state tends
to be authoritarian. Most of these states had a attempt at democracy
that was quickly stamped out by the rising dictator. (Elaborates on
Kyrgyzstan, turkmenistan , and belarus(doesn't talk about romania as a
counter example))

Stalemated Transitions: Protracted Confrontation and Imposition

Where the other paths are more consistent, the power balance leads to
protracted conflict. In general, the USSR Gorbachev reforms allowed for
the presence of anti-communist political forces. This created a struggle
between the old-guard and the rising democratic forces. While this would
theoretically lead to compromise, in these cases it lead to violence.
This included coup in Russia, Ukraine, Tajikistan, and violence in
Moldova. In general, the paths of these countries has been more unstable
and uncertain. It is this stalemate of power that leads to a variety of
transition paths, and backsliding.

So what causes a country to have its specific balance of power? The
author does not seek to prove this, but gives some explanations. One is
geography. Countries seem to be clustered regionally. But this might be
representing culture, history, economic development, or other factors.
Additionally, for these countries, the moment of transition is
exogenous. The fall of the USSR was the specific moment that codified
the balance of power amongst the elites. The rise of democratic elites
in the 1980s and autocrats in the 1980s could have never had a long term
effect. But because that event coincided with the fall of the USSR,
those power balances have great effects.
