# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: A theory of endogenous institutional change
author(s): AVNER #GREIF and DAVID D. #LAITIN 
year: #y2004
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Institutions #Historical_Institutionalism #Rational_Choice 
keywords: 

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

**[Greif/Laitin:]{.underline}**

**[A theory of endogenous institutional change]{.underline}**

This article pairs well with Hall/Taylor, as they argue that the three
new strands of institutionalism have developed independently from each
other and do not have much overlap. Greif and Laitin suggest to combine
rational choice institutionalism with the historical institutionalism to
create a dynamic institutionalism model to explain institutional
stability and change.

In particular they want to answer three key questions:

1)  **Why and how institutions change?**

2)  **How do institutions persist in a changing environment?**

3)  **How can the process that itself unleashes lead to the
    institution's demise?**

This model is based on game-theoretic foundation within the repeated
game framework.

It introduces two new concepts of *quasi-parameters and
self-reinforcement.*

They define institutions as a system of human-made, non-physical
elements (norms, beliefs, organizations, rules) exogenous to each
individual whose behavior it influences that generates behavioral
regularities (635).

An institutional change is a change in belief, and it occurs when the
associated behavior is no longer self-enforcing, leading individuals to
act in a manner that does not reproduce the associated beliefs (639).

Usual game-theoretic approach only looks at the rules of the game and
how the regulation of behavior is generated in the particular
transaction under consideration.

However, institutions influence other factors. They influence, for
instance, wealth, identity, ability, and knowledge, which are generally
considered parameters in rules of the game. It is hard to prove but also
hard to ignore that institutions do impact more than just the
transaction they govern.

In game-theory a particular equilibrium can be sustained over a broad
range of parameters. A change in parameters does not predict a
behavioral change.

According to Schelling there are three reasons for why an individual
would follow old patterns even with marginal parametric change:

-   Knowledge: Game theory assumes perfect knowledge, which is not the
    case in reality; a change in the environment puts individual in a
    position of not knowing how to respond given that they have no clue
    what others think, it becomes easier (more rational) to just follow
    the rules that have existed in the past

-   Attention: attention is a scarce resource, institutional rules are
    almost like a "heuristic device" in a complicated situation, if one
    might not notice a parametric shift it is once again easier to rely
    on old rules without questioning

-   Coordination: when change occurs, individuals faces the problem of
    which behavior to follow in a new situation, relying on past is
    easier even if new changes more beneficial, issues like sunk costs,
    free rider problems, asymmetric information contribute to the
    coordination problem

Usually in game-theory parameters have two properties:

1)  They can be gradually altered by the implications of the institution
    under study.

2)  Their marginal change will not necessarily cause the behavior
    associated with that institution to change (639).

They are not acknowledged in game theory because changes of these
features are not ex ante recognized or anticipated.

The authors, however, add that these features are not real parameters:
they are quasi-parameters, which change endogenously and which do not
directly condition behavior. Their changes and implications are not
recognized by actors in a transaction.

The authors argue that changes in quasi-parameters can reinforce or
undermine an institution that implies those parameters â†’

When studying the self-enforcing (generating a particular pattern of
behavior) property of an institution in the **short run** we have to
consider the features as parametric, meaning **fixed and exogenous**.

When studying the self-enforcing property of an institution in the
**long run** we have to consider the features as **endogenous and
variable**.

An institution is reinforcing a behavior when the associated behavior is
self-enforcing in a larger set of situations than otherwise would have
been the case.

An institution is undermining a behavior when the associated behavior is
self-enforcing in a smaller set of situations than otherwise would have
been the case.

Generally institutions change through an endogenous process, exogenous
shocks, or a combination of them both.

New institutions organically evolve through changing, introducing, or
manipulating institutional elements while supplementing existing
elements.

If the quasi-parameter is observable, then the change is intentional. If
it is not observable, then it depends on the willingness of the players
to follow the rules (or not).

A sufficient condition for endogenous institutional change is that the
institution's implications constantly undermine the associated behavior
(639).

Endogenous change happens indirectly if a subject becomes more or less
sensitive to exogenous shocks. It happens directly if rules weakly
reinforces and thus allowing for change to happen in the long run.

To illustrate their dynamic model they have two-paired comparisons of
institutions, which are two case studies illuminating their theory. They
acknowledge in their concluding remarks that larger case sets would be
needed, because right now it resembles more finding cases that neatly
fit their model.

The first comparison is about Venice and Genoa, two Italian cities in
the early 1000s, and their political regime (institution) . The
comparison is based on historical archives. The parametric change is one
of long duration. Both institutions are self-enforcing. However, Venice'
early modern political structure on top was self-reinforcing. Genoa's
wasn't. Even though, both cities in their structure were almost
identical, Genoa's lack of self-reinforcing change caused civil war and
economic stagnation.

The second comparison is about Nigeria and Estonia political cleavage
structure (1930s/40s). It's based on fieldwork. In this case the
parametric change is a projection of trends. Nigeria's cleavage
structure is self-reinforcing. Estonia's was not, allowing for potential
changes in political organizations of interest.

*I will only illustrate the case of Venice/Genoa. If you want to look at
a table summarizing the two cases or read in-depth how Russian impact
changed Estonia's political cleavage structure, you can do so on pages
641-642.*

In Venice and Genoa clans ruled the societal structure.

In Genoa inter clan cooperation led to increased economic prosperity
(endogenous change in quasi-parameter), which in turn increased the
competition over the domination of the city. This led to an arms race
amongst the clans out of fear that another clan might take over. Their
disputes were briefly interrupted by the external threat of the Emperor
Barbarossa. His departure reinforced the prior conditions of increased
wealth and the stable belief of dominance, which combined could not
sustain an equilibrium amongst the clans, which turned into civil war
amongst the clan. To counter the violence and upheaval a *podesta* was
implemented, which was a self-enforcing organization that restored the
inter-clan mutual deterrence and cooperation. Its existence was a
military threat which deterred each clan to try to grab the power in the
city. It only contained the rivalry but didn't eliminate it. The
institution of the podesta was, therefore, not self-reinforcing but only
self-enforcing. It worked in the short-run, in the long run this system
collapsed. In Genoa disorder was dominant, and the clans became more
important.

Just like in Genoa, clans in Venice were rivals. A complex
electoral/governmental structure was created to counter any take-over by
one of the clans. It fostered a common Venetian identity and decreased
the importance of the individual clans. The system of selecting people
for leadership positions was self-enforcing because the clans joined to
counter one another's power grabs. It was reinforcing as well because it
created in the long-run an incentives for individuals rather than clans
to seek loyalties amongst the common population and not just amongst
their groups. Thus the societal clan-structure was changed over time.

In their conclusion, the authors reiterate that rational choice
institutionalism and historic institutionalism are not mutually
contradicting. Their dynamic approach consolidates both to a degree and
allows for better observations and explanations of change.
