# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Informal Institutions and Comparative Politics: A Research Agenda
author(s): Gretchen #Helmke and Steven #Levitsky
year: #y2003
citation: 
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Institutions #Informal_Institutions 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

**Informal Institutions and Comparative Politics: A Research Agenda**

Gretchen Helmke and Steven Levitsky

This article broadens the scope of comparative research on political
institutions by laying the foundation for a systematic analysis of
informal rules. Their approach is simple: institutional analysis
requires rigorous attention to both formal and informal rules. Careful
attention to informal institutions (Further II) is critical to
understanding the incentives that enable and constrain political
behavior. In some instances, informal incentives trump the formal ones
(for example culture of corruption).

Here authors Describe different areas where informal rules/institutions
have impact

-   Consideration of informal rules is often critical to explaining
    institutional outcomes.

-   Informal institutions also mediate the effects of electoral rules.

-   Informal institutions also shape formal institutional outcomes in a
    less visible way: by creating or strengthening incentives to comply
    with formal rules (enabling and constraining effect)

-   Informal rules shape formal institutional outcomes in areas such as
    legislative politics, judicial politics, party organization,
    campaign finance, regime change, federalism, public administration,
    and state building.

**What Informal Institutions Are (and Are Not)**

*Institutions as rules and procedures (both formal and informal) that
structure social interaction by constraining and enabling actors\'
behavior.* The authors review several definitions for difference between
formal and informal institutions and reject them and suggest their
definition:

*Informal institutions as socially shared rules, usually unwritten, that
are created, communicated, and enforced outside of officially sanctioned
channels.*

By contrast formal institutions go through channels widely accepted as
official.

Four important features that are not part of II's definition:

-   Formal institutions should be distinguished from weak institutions.
    Weakness of formal institutions may bring informal institutions but
    those two things are separate. Clientelism is II while abuse of
    executive authority is non-institutional behavior.

-   II must be distinguished from other informal behavioral
    regularities. Removing one\'s hat in church is an II, whereas
    removing one\'s coat in a restaurant is simply a behavioral
    regularity (no Social disapproval or sanction)

-   II should be distinguished from informal organizations. It is about
    distinction between actors (or \"players\") from the rules they
    follow.

-   Distinction between II and the broader concept of culture. II are
    shared expectations rather than shared values.

**Four Types of Informal Institution**

Typology aimed at capturing the relationship between formal and informal
institutions.

One camp (of scholars) treats IIs as *functional*, or problem solving,
in that they provide solutions to problems of social interaction and
coordination. A second camp treats IIs as *dysfunctional*, or problem
creating. However, recent studies suggest a more complex picture in
which IIs at times reinforce or substitute for the formal institutions
they appear to undermine.

To capture these differences, authors' typology is based on two
dimensions:

-   Degree to which formal and informal institutional outcomes converge

-   Effectiveness of the relevant formal institution (extent to which
    rules and procedures that exist on paper are enforced and complied
    with in practice)

These two dimensions produce the fourfold typology shown in the table.
Complementary correspond to the functional while competing correspond to
dysfunctional.

**Complementary IIs**

Such institutions \"fill in gaps\" either by addressing contingencies
not dealt with in the formal rules or by facilitating the pursuit of
individual goals within the formal institutional framework. Such IIs
Enhance efficiency. Creating or strengthening incentives to comply with
formal rules that might otherwise exist merely on paper (example:
effectiveness of the U.S. Constitution to a complementary set of shared
beliefs and expectations among citizens). IIs play a key role in making
effective the formal rules of the game.

**Accommodating IIs**

These IIs create incentives to behave in ways that alter the substantive
effects of formal rules, but without directly violating them. Help to
reconcile interests of those who dislike outcomes generated by the
formal rule with the existing formal institutional arrangements. Hence,
although accommodating IIs may not be efficiency enhancing, they may
enhance the stability of formal institutions by dampening demands for
change. Authors give several examples here is one of them: Adherence to
the formal rules governing Soviet political and economic life did not
allow enterprises to fulfill state targets or permit individuals to meet
basic needs, a set of informal norms-commonly known as *blat*-emerged in
which individuals met these goals through personal networks. Not
strictly illegal, blat enabled factory managers, workers, and
bureaucrats to \"find a way around formal procedures.

**Competing IIs**

These IIs structure incentives in ways that are incompatible with the
formal rules: to follow one rule, actors must violate another
(clientelism, patrimonialism, clan politics, and corruption). Postwar
Italian corruption was embedded in \"alternative norms\" under which
actors could violate certain state laws \"with impunity", whereas those
who adhered to the law \"met with certain punishment.\"

**Substitutive IIs**

Employed by actors who seek outcomes compatible with formal rules and
procedures, However, they exist in environments where formal rules are
not routinely enforced. Tend to emerge where state structures are weak
or lack authority. For instance, "gentleman\'s agreements". Here is one
of the examples: In rural northern Peru, where state weakness resulted
in inadequate police protection and ineffective courts during the late
1970s, citizens created informal self-defense patrols to defend their
communities and informal courts to resolve local disputes.

**Origins of Informal Institutions**

Why Informal Institutions?

Why, given the existence of a set of formal rules and rule-making
mechanisms, do actors choose to create informal rules? Building on the
previous section, authors see three general motivations: 1. Because
formal institutions are incomplete. Actors operating within a particular
formal institutional context, develop norms and procedures that expedite
their work or address problems not anticipated by formal rule.

2\. IIs may be a \"second best\" strategy for actors who prefer, but
cannot achieve, a formal institutional solution. In some cases, actors
simply lack the power to change the formal rule. In other words, actors
create IIs when they deem it less costly than creating formal
institutions to their liking. Inventing IIs may also be a second-best
strategy, where formal institutions exist on paper but are ineffective
in practice. Actors create informal structures not because they dislike
the formal rules, but because the existing rules-and rule-making
processes-lack credibility.

3\. Pursuit of goals not considered publicly acceptable. Because they
are relatively inconspicuous, IIs allow actors to pursue activities that
are ranging from the unpopular to the illegal (Prostitution, soft drug
use, and euthanasia).

Informal institutions may also be created in pursuit of goals that are
not internationally acceptable. Fro instance countries like Belarus,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Peru, Russia, Ukraine, and Zimbabwe resorted to
informal mechanisms of coercion and control.

**How Informal Institutions are Created and Communicated**

informal rules are created, communicated, and enforced outside of public
channels, and usually outside of the public eye.

-   "Top down" process of emergence: Informal institutions may be a
    product of elite design and imposition or out of elite-level
    strategic interaction (rules of decision making in specific
    organization).

-   Decentralized process involving a much larger number (corruption,
    clientelism, blat) actors

In either process, we may understand mechanisms of emergence in terms of
focal points, repeated interaction, or bargaining.

Alternatively, informal institutional creation may be a historically
contingent process in which informal structures are an unintended
product of particular conflicts and compromise.

It is also important to identify actors who communicated the rules

-   In some cases, informal institutionalization appears to be a process
    of social learning through widely observed instances of trial and
    error.

-   Social networks and political organizations may also transmit
    informal rule (for instance corruption)

**Informal Institutional**

Informal institutions are often characterized as highly resistant to
change. Since informal rules \"do not possess a center which directs and
co-ordinates their actions,\" informal institutional change is likely to
be an \"extremely lengthy\" process. Yet informal institutions do
change-and often quite quickly.

Several sources may generate the impetus for informal institutional
change.

-   formal institutional change (the extent that formal institutional
    change alters the costs and benefits of adhering to particular
    informal rules)

    -   Change in formal institutional design. In the case of
        complementary informal institutions, for example, modifying the
        relevant formal rules may change the nature of the gaps that the
        informal institution had been designed to address

    -   Changes in formal institutional strength or effectiveness (level
        of enforcement of formal rules alter the costs and benefit). For
        example, compliance with competing informal institutions becomes
        more costly with increased enforcement of the formal rule.

-   Informal institutions may also change as the status quo conditions
    that sustain them change

> Figure 2 summarizes these sources of informal institutional change

**Research Challenges: Identification, Measurement, and Comparison**

Identifying informal institutions is more challenging. A country\'s
constitution can tell us whether it has a presidential or parliamentary
system of government, but it cannot tell us about the pervasiveness of
clientelism or kinship networks

Efforts to identify informal institutions should answer three basic
question:

What are the actors\' shared expectations about the actual constraints
they face?

What is the community to which the informal rules apply?

How are informal rules enforced?

Identifying the shared expectations and enforcement mechanisms that
sustain informal institutions is a challenging task, requiring in most
cases substantial knowledge of the community within which the informal
institutions are embedded. This mean a lot of filed work and studies of
N=1or theoretical studies (N=0) or small N comparison.

Small-n analyses can begin to identify patterns of informal
institutional effects, formal-informal institutional interaction, and
informal institutional change.

Large-n surveys may also prove useful in research on infor- mal
institutions. Survey research may capture actors\' expec- tations and
beliefs about the \"actual\" rules of the game.
