# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Fighting Corruption to Improve Schooling: Evidence from a Newspaper
Campaign in Uganda
author(s): Ritva #Reinikka and Jakob #Svensson 
year: #y2005
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Schooling #Corruption #Welfare #Social_Policy 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary


Fighting Corruption to Improve Schooling: Evidence from a Newspaper
Campaign in Uganda

Ritva Reinikka and Jakob Svensson (2005)

Sorry, no time for photos

Abstract

What are the most effective ways to increase primary school enrollment
and student learning? We argue that innovations in governance of social
services may yield the highest return since social service delivery in
developing countries is often plagued by inefficiencies and corruption.
We illustrate this by using data from an unusual policy experiment. A
newspaper campaign in Uganda aimed at reducing capture of public funds
by providing schools (parents) with information to monitor local
officials' handling of a large education grant program. The campaign was
highly successful and the reduction in capture had a positive effect on
enrollment and student learning.

RQ: What are the most effective ways to increase primary school
enrollment and student learning?

IV: Newspaper information campaign (providing parents with information
to monitor local officials' handling of a large education grant program)

DV: Primary school enrollment

Results: After the newspaper campaign started, enrollment increased more
rapidly in schools closer to a newspaper outlet (where schools were
receiving more funds due to less capture by local government officials).
In addition, using (BjoÌˆrkman 2004), the authors found that both
enrollment and test scores increased significantly more in schools in
areas with higher newspaper penetration (again, in schools with more
funds).
