
# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: The Three Political Economies of the Welfare States
author(s): Gosta #Esping-Andersen
year: #y1991 
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Social_Policy #Welfare_State 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary




Chapter 1- The Three Political Economies of the Welfare States:

By: Gosta Esping-Andersen

*The Legacy of Classical Political Economy*

Two central questions in the welfare state.

1.  "Will the salience of class diminish with the extension of social
    citizenship?

2.  What are the causal forces behind welfare-state development?" (9)

In western liberal democracies, these questions manifest themselves in
the balance between government social intervention, and laissez-faire
economics. Historically, the dominant thinking in states has existed
between Marxism and Conservative political economic theories. This
debate is embedded with democratic institutions. *Can parliamentary
democracy 'solve' class divisions and social inequalities?* With this in
mind voting rights were expanded. But others claim that some states
purposefully expanded the franchise to limit the power of socialist
movements.

*The Political Economy of the Welfare State*

Contemporary social science has major scientific differences from
classical economic theories. One is that claims are positivist in
nature, and avoid normative claims. Another is that we now incorporate
historical variability. (12) But there are key differences in the
literature, and two major types of theories. Structuralist/System
theories, and Institutions & Actor theories.

*The Systems/Structuralist Approach*

This approach is trying to look at an entire political economic
wholistically. So the approach tends to care more about cross-national
similarities rather than differences.

One type is focused on the 'theory of industrial society' and says that
industrialization is the driver of social policy. Pre-industrial
institutions cannot exist in an industrial society, and are destroyed,
then replaced with modern ones. This theory is connected to
modernization theory. The 'welfare function' is then appropriated to the
national government.

A major change agent in the bureaucracy. The modern industrial state
generates a modern bureaucracy, due to its efficiency over other means
of organization.

This theory fails to explain why similarly industrializing states
experience social policy change at different rates.

Structural Marxism has similar logic. That industrialization creates
capital accumulation, which generates social reform. Welfare states
don't need to be promoted by social agents, rather the logic of
collective social programs. This theory has two assumptions, one is that
power is structural, and that the state is relatively autonomous from
class directives. (14)

*The Institutional Approach*

These approaches want to separate the political from the economic. Part
of this stems from the original laissez-faire thinking. Democracy cannot
resist demands from the majority, and the majority will favor
redistribution vs overcoming market weaknesses. Essentially, a continual
expansion of public expenditure.

This thinking doesn't have a large amount of empirical evidence.
Historically, states with more limited welfare states are those that
have had democracy the longest. Often this evidence has been explained
by social structure. That these societies didn't have a large working
class demanding a larger welfare state. Basically, in states where
farmers can align with working class voters = a larger welfare state.

*What is the Welfare State*

Textbook definition, "it involves state responsibility for securing some
basic modicum of welfare for its citizens" (18-19). This is an early
conception. This definition assumes that expenditure completely reflects
a state's commitment to welfare. Political Intent was considered baked
into the process.

However, later scholarship has tended to focus less on spending. Rather,
not all spending is created equal. Some spend a lot on fiscal welfare in
the form of tax rebates, orther spend on healthcare. Those choices
reflect political values.

When is a state a welfare state?

1.  A welfare state exists when a majority of state activity (spending
    and personnel) affects the needs of an individual household.

So how much does spending and personnel care about households, rather
than defense, law and order, etc? This would mean that welfare states
didn't emerge till the 1970s.

> 2\. When the state has extended welfare commitments to all areas of
> distribution vital for societal welfare.

This is a more flexible definition, and more complicated. It is
emphasising the state's concept of citizen rights. And cares more about
universal commitments, rather than targeted commitments.

3\. Lets select some criteria to judge all welfare states.

Then we can model all countries similarly. How much do you spend/provide
in these specific areas. Regardless of any specific countries idea of
welfare state.

*A Re-Specification of the Welfare State*)

The Welfare state much take into account the state's interconnectivity
with market and family's role in providing social goods.

*Rights and De-commodification*

In the modern society, almost all economic activity has entered the cash
market. Very little activity on anything else. (aka small town
bartering). De-commodification occurs when a "service is rendered as a
matter of right, and when a person can maintain a livelihood without
reliance on the market." (21-22) Social assistance programs and social
insurance programs work in this area, but often do not completely
de-commodify society. Often there are means-tested programs that work as
a safety net of last resort.

This has been a priority for 'labor' political movements. Mostly it
exists in countries with three different ways. One is means-tested aid,
or attaching social welfare to working. This puts workers back into the
labor market. Another way is compulsory state social insurance. Where
the state is obligated to pay a certain amount, usually with various
rules on eligibility. Often tailored to age. Third is a basic, equal
benefit for all, irrespective of prior earnings.

*The Welfare State as a System of Stratification*

What kind of social structure is being produced by the existing social
policy? There are many different societies that have been promoted by
the variation in social policies. Often social insurance policies can
drive wedges between working class groups. I.e. the ones on assistance
and the ones working.

Another example is corporatist traditions, which offer large social
welfare policies to members of the civil service, and create a
fragmentation among the middle class.

Labor movements that offer poor relief are trying to get universal
assistance, but most policies end up favoring the most organized groups
and leaving out weaker ones. (aka no minimum wage for waiters)

More social leaning countries, tend to try to get a universalistic
system. Which provides regardless of class or market position. This is
designed to spread solidarity though the nation, and strengthens the
working class.

*Welfare State Regimes*

Liberal Welfare States:

Typically offer means-tested assistance, modest universal transfers, and
modest social-insurance. The benefits are designed to help a small
number of state dependent individuals. The state is encouraging
individuals to enter the private market, and only helping on the margin.
Examples: U.S., Canada, Australia

2nd Cluster- Historical Corporatist legacy

Countries have a historical corporatist-statist legacy, which remained
while the state industrialized. Liberal ideas of market efficiency and
maximizing productivity, have never really been completely adopted.
Ideas of social rights were passed without conflict, but status has
never left. The state has always been the primary provider, but the
state has also upheld status differences. Programs are strongly in favor
of traditional family values. Often favoring non-working wives, and
motherhood. Ex. Austria, France, Germany, Italy

Third Cluster- Universalism

These countries have applied universal social programs, and a welfare
state that is actively promoting equality. "All benefit, all are
dependent, and all will presumably feel obligated to pay."(28) There is
a fusion of welfare and work, guaranteeing full-time employment and
having large obligations. Ex. Scandinavian countries

*The Causes of Welfare-State Regimes*

"The hope of finding one single powerful causal force must be abandoned;
the task is to identify salient interaction-effects." (29)

Any working class mobilization theory must pay attention to union
structure. The working class has almost never constituted a electoral
majority. Class mobilization is dependent on class coalitions than on
one class power. Often the role of farmers has been critical for social
democratic development.

Post WWII middle class has also played a pivotal role. Countries which
managed to unite middle and working classes into a coalition have
expanded social programs, where others have failed to do so.

Conclusion: It is much more complicated than simply a class-mobilization
theory.
