# Metadata
## Identifiers
title:  The De-Commodification in Social Policy
author(s): #Esping-Andersen
year: #y1991
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Social_Policy #Welfare_State 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary




Esping-Andersen

Chapter 2: The De-Commodification in Social Policy

The blossoming of capitalism came with the withering away of
pre-commodified protection. When the satisfaction of wants implied the
purchase of commodities, the issue of purchasing-power and income
distribution became salient. When labor power also became a commodity,
people's rights to survive outside the market also are at stake. The
problem of commodification lay at the heart of Marx's analysis of class
development in the accumulation process: transformation of independent
producers to property-less wage-earners.

Polanyi IDs a contradiction in laissez-faire capitalism's drive to
commodify labor: while the system can only evolve by commodifying labor,
by doing so it also sows the seeds of its destruction -- if labor power
is nothing but a commodity, it will likely destruct. Welfare, if not
survival, came to depend on the willingness of someone to hire one's
labor power. With no recourse to property, and no state to which human
needs can be directed, the market becomes to the worker a prison that it
has to behave in as a commodity to survive.

Workers are not commodities like others because they must survive: it is
possible to withhold a machine from the market until the price is right,
but labor cannot withhold itself for long because workers need
subsistence.

As commodities, workers are captive to powers beyond control (sickness,
business cycle, etc.). Workers will also compete, driving the price for
labor down. The variability of welfare-state evolution reflects
competing response to pressures for de-commodification.

De-commodification =/= complete eradication of labor as a commodity

De-commodification = the degree to which individuals/families can uphold
a socially acceptable standard of living independently of market
participation. Conflicts have mainly revolved around what degree of
market immunity is permissible.

**Pre-Commodification and the Legacy of Conservatism**

Pre-capitalist society was not the absence of the commodity form. It was
the commodity form of labor which was undeveloped. A hallmark of
conservative ideology is its view that the commodification of
individuals is morally degrading, socially corrupting, atomizing, and
anomic -- individuals are not meant to compete or struggle, but to
subordinate self-interest to recognized authority and prevailing
institutions. Conservatism has had three models to address
commodification: feudal, corporatist, and etatist \[essentially the 3
regime types from chapter 1\].

In almost every country, it was the conservative tradition that gave
rise to the first systematic and deliberate attacks on the
commodification of labor. Why? (1) conservative forces feared that the
onward march of liberalism, democracy, and capitalism would destroy the
institutions upon which their power and privileges were based, and (2)
the pre-commodified status of workers was the model already available
and typically also present in the heyday of laissez-faire; it was a
response that came naturally, and which could claim considerable
legitimacy.

Schumpeter: The capitalist order worked because it was ruled and
organized by the protective strata of an earlier era. The social policy
of 'pre-commodification' was, one of the 'flying buttresses that
prevented capitalism's collapse.'

**The Liberal Response to the Dilemmas of Commodification**

The pure and undiluted labor commodity we associate with laissez-faire
probably never existed in real life. Argument from liberals (Smiley &
Martineau) was a double one: (1) a guaranteed social minimum would cause
poverty and unemployment, not eradicate it, and (2) social protection
caused moral corruption, thriftless, idleness, and drunkenness.

General assumption of liberalism = market is emancipatory, a shell for
self-reliance and industriousness. Its self-regulating mechanisms will
ensure that all who want to work will be employed and be able to secure
their own welfare.

Raw model of liberalism of course has its weaknesses -- not everyone can
participate in the market (old, infirm, blind, crippled, etc.), saving
can be difficult when wages approximate survival, and almost no
individual can prepare for prolonged crisis.

Liberalism recognized in the principles of public good a rationale for
social intervention (e.g., lighthouses so ships don't crash).

How did liberalism come to terms with labor commodification dilemma? Two
possible answers:

(1) Transfer a modified version of the 'less eligibility' principle from
    the old poor laws into a framework of means-tested social
    assistance. Unconditional social rights would be avoided, and
    government largesse would be reserved for the certifiably needy, not
    those who choose not to work. Public obligation enters only where
    markets fail.

(2) Charity or insurance based on voluntarism and that, insurance
    arrangements be soundly contractual and actuarial. Rights and
    benefits must reflect contributions. Once liberalism came to accept
    the principle of unionism, it was also perfectly capable of
    extending the idea of individual insurance to collectively bargained
    social benefits.

Summary: Liberalism's accommodation of social protection is in practice
more elastic than is normally thought, precisely because under certain
conditions it promises to strengthen the commodity status of labor
without adverse social effects.

**De-Commodification as the Politics of Socialism**

Socialism emerged as a response to capitalism's commodification of
labor. Natural that workers' desire for de-commodification became the
guiding principle of labor-movement policy. In general, revolutionary
and reformist theories both agreed on the necessity and desirability of
struggling for the right to a social income outside of wage labor. What
divided the reformist and revolutionary wings of socialism was mainly
issues of strategy.

Absolutely wrong to believe socialists have a blueprint for
de-commodification. Two sources of confusion: (1) interpretation of the
'ability-needs' nexus, central to Marxism, and (2) the clientele for
de-commodification, a shift from workerist parties to universal
coverage.

What characterizes almost all early socialist social policy is the
notion of basic, or minimal, social rights: the idea was to install
strong entitlements, but at fairly modest benefit levels, and typically
limited to the core areas of human need (old-age, accidence insurance,
unemployment, sickness). Financial constraints played a role, but so to
did problem definition: stave off poverty v worker emancipation.

**Welfare States and De-Commodification in the Real World**

How do we adequately operationalize the crucial dimensions? Including:
eligibility rules and restrictions, income replacement, and the range of
entitlements.

[Conditions for Entitlements]{.underline}:

We can distinguish 3 kinds of arrangements: (1) entitlements built
around demonstrable and abject needs \[means-tested\], (2) extension of
entitlements based on work performance \[pay-as-you-go systems\], and
(3) universal rights of citizenship regardless of degree of need or
extent of work performance \[flat-rate benefit\]. There are no
one-dimensional nations in the pure sense.

We can empirically distinguish between welfare states' capacity to
de-commodify. See Table 2.1 (p 50) below for de-commodification indices.
This measures the program's potential for de-commodification, not its
general qualities. Capturing the degree of market-independent


height="3.1406036745406825in"}

The idea that welfare states cluster into 3 groups is evident in table
2.2 (p 52) below. Low level of de-commodification in liberal-dominated
nations, high-decommodification clustered in social democratic dominated
nations, and etatist regimes dominate the middle.


height="3.6073818897637797in"}

From these we can create 2 guiding hypotheses:

(1) "Nations with a long historical legacy of conservative and/or
    Catholic reformism are likely to develop a fair degree of
    de-commodified social policy at an early date. Their welfare,
    states, nonetheless, circumscribe the loosening of the market's
    bonds with powerful social-control devices, such as a proven record
    of strong employment attachment or strong familial obligations. The
    superior performance on de-commodification that we find in countries
    such as Austria, Belgium, and the Netherlands after 1950 can
    probably best be ascribed to the strong political position of the
    social democratic labor movements."

(2) "Nations with powerful liberalist legacy will bifurcate, depending
    on the structuration of political power. Where social democracy
    comes to political dominance, as in Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, the
    liberal mold in broken and replaced by with a highly de-commodifying
    social democratic welfare-state regime. Where, on the other hand,
    labor fails to realign the nation's political economy and assert
    dominance, the result is continuously low, or at most, moderate
    de-commodification. This is exemplified by Great Britain at one end,
    and by Canada and the US at the other end."

    a.  "The Labour party's breakthrough in Britain is evidence by the
        fact that Britain scored in the top de-commodification group in
        1950: the universalist social citizenship of the Beveridge model
        that was launched after the war placed Britain as the highest
        scoring nation internationally. The system was certainly not
        undone by the 1980s, but it failed to progress further; Labour's
        record of post-war power was too weak and intrupted to match the
        accomplishments in Scandinavia. "

    b.  "The US and Canada, in turn, are the 'pure' cases of liberal
        hegemony, virtually unchallenged by the paradigmatic
        alternatives of socialism or, for that matter, conservative
        reform."
