# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: Varieties of Capitalism
author(s): Peter A. #Hall and David #Soskice
year: #y2001
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Welfare_State #Capitalism #Economic_Systems
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

Peter A. Hall and David Soskice: Varieties of Capitalism (2001):

PP 3-68:

Neo-corporatism developed in 1970s in response to inflation: associated
with the capacity of a state to negotiate durable bargains with
employers and the trade union movement regarding wages, working
conditions, and social or economic policy. Capacity depended on
centralization or concentration of trade union movement (see Olson).

1980s/1990s "social systems of production" approach gained currency:
group analyses of sectoral governance, national innovation systems, and
flexible production regimes that are diverse in some respects but united
by several key analytic features. More attention firm behavior -- from
mass production schemes to new production regimes that depend on
collective institutions at the regional, sectoral, or national level.
Stresses the ways institutions generate trust or enhance learning within
economic communities.

Authors **argue** that features of states once seen as attributes of
strength actually make the implementation of many economic policies more
difficult; and we seek a basis for comparison more deeply rooted in the
organization of the private sector. Authors want to bring firms back
into the center of analysis for comparative capitalism and highlight
role that business associations and other types of relationships among
firms play in the political economy.

Authors premises is that many of the most important institutional
structures (labor regulation, education & training, and corporate
governance) depend on the presence of regulatory regimes that are the
preserve of the nation-state. They look at national-level differences
and terms in which the characterize them that are more general or
parsimonious.

Three frameworks of relationship between institutions and firm behavior:
(1) firms are socializing agencies -- instill a set of norms of
attitudes in those in them, (2) effects of institutions follow from the
power it confers specific actors through resource hierarchy, and (3)
institutions are a matrix of sanctions and incentives to which the
actors respond so that behavior can be predicated automatically from the
presence of specific institutions.

These miss or model too incompletely the strategic interactions central
to the actor behavior. The most important institutions are those that
condition the interactions.

**1.2. The Basic Elements of the Approach**

Varieties of capitalism approach is actor-centered.

[1.2.1 A Relational View of the Firm]{.underline}:

Authors see firms as actors seeking to develop and exploit core
competencies or dynamic capabilities understood as capacities for
developing, producing, and distributing goods and service profitably.
Critical to these is the quality of relationships the firm establishes
both internally and externally. Because its capabilities are relational,
firms encounter coordination problems -- its success depends on its
ability to coordinate effectively with a wide range of actors.

Five spheres in which firms must develop relationships to solve
coordination problems: (1) industrial relations -- coordinating wages
and working conditions, (2) vocational training and education --
securing workforce with suitable skills (and workers figure out which
skills are useful), (3) corporate governance -- where firms turn for
access to finance and which investors seek assurance of ROI, (4)
inter-firm relations -- where companies forms with other enterprises
(suppliers or clients) to secure stable demand for products, inputs, and
technology, and (5) employees -- to ensure employees have requisite
competencies and cooperate well with others to advance firm objectives.

[1.2.2 Liberal Market Economies and Coordinated Market
Economies]{.underline}:

National political economies can be compared by reference to how firms
resolve coordination problem among the 5 spheres. Two types: (1) liberal
market economies (LME) -- firms coordinate their activities primarily
via hierarchies and competitive market arrangements & coordinated market
economies (CME) -- firms depend more heavily on non-market relationships
to coordinate their endeavors with other actors and to construct their
core competencies. In any national economy, firms will gravitate toward
the mode of coordination for which there is institutional support.

[1.2.3 The Role of Institutions and Organizations]{.underline}:

Institutions -- a set of rules, formal or informal, the actors generally
follow, whether for normative, cognitive, or material reasons, and
organizations as durable entities with formally recognized members,
whose rules also contribute to the institutions of the political
economy.

Markets = institutions that support relationships of particular types
market by arms-length relations and competition.

Coordination requires institutions that reduce uncertainty actors have
about each other's behavior -- they provide capacities for: (1) the
exchange of information among the actors, (2) the monitoring of
behavior, and (3) the sanctioning of defection from cooperative
endeavors. These institutions could include business associations, trade
unions, cross-shareholding networks, legal/regulatory systems.
Vocational training schemes collaboration is made more possible when the
institutions are there to make sure there are enough skilled employees.
Similarly, institutions give investors information and confidence.

Deliberative institutions (those that encourage discussion and agreement
among actors) are also important. Deliberation can thicken the knowledge
necessary for game-theoretical cooperation. Also allows for firms to
deal with exogenous shocks better.

[1.2.4 The Role of Culture, Informal Rules, and History]{.underline}:

Authors emphasize the importance of informal rules and understanding to
achieve the equilibria in strategic interactions -- entry point for
history and culture. Actors learn to follow a set of informal rules by
virtue of experience with a familiar set of actors and the shared
understandings that accumulate form this experience constitute something
like a common culture.

[1.2.5 Institutional Infrastructure and Corporate Strategy]{.underline}:

Authors stress the systematic variation found in the character of
corporate structure (or hierarchies) across different types of economies
and the presence of coordination problems even within hierarchical
settings. Because infrastructure is collective institutions, a single
firm cannot create them, and because they have multifarious effects, it
may be difficult for groups of firms to agree on them. Even when firms
agree, it may entail regulatory action and coalition formation.

Result = firms located in a political economy face a set of coordinating
institutions whose character is not fully under their control. Approach
predicts systematic differences in corporate strategy across nations,
and differences that parallel the overarching institutional structure of
the political economy.

Authors contend the differences in the institutional framework of the
political economy generate systematic differences in corporate strategy
cross LMEs and CMEs. See difference between British firms (pass price
increase on to consumer) and German firms (absorb price increase to
maintain market share).

CME firms should be more willing to invest in specific and co-specific
assets (those that cannot readily be turned to another purpose and
assets whose returns depend heavily on the active cooperation of others.
More institutional support for strategic interactions required to
realize value of co-specific assets.

LME firms should invest more extensively in switchable assets (those
whose value can be realized if diverted to other purposes). More
opportunities to more resources around in search of higher returns.

[1.2.6 Institutional Complementarities]{.underline}:

Complementary goods: two goods (like bread and butter), where a price
increase in one depresses demand for the other. Also exists among firms:
e.g., market arrangements that offer customized products, may offer high
returns when coupled to the use of flexible machine tools on the shop
floor.

Two institutions complementary if the presence (or efficiency) of one
increases the returns (or efficiency) of the other. Example: returns
from a stock market trading in corporate securities may be increased by
regulations mandating a fuller exchange of information about companies.
Suggests nations with a coordination in one sphere of the economy should
tend to develop complementary practices in other spheres as well.

A highly developed stock market indicates greater reliance on market
modes of coordination in the financial sphere, and high levels of
employment protection tend to reflect higher levels of non-market
coordination in the sphere of industrial relations. See figure 1.1 below
from p 19.

LMEs: US, UK, Australia, Canada, NZ, and Ireland

CMEs: Germany, Japan, Switzerland, Netherlands, Belgium, Sweden, Norway,
Denmark, Finland, and Austria

Six ambiguous: France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece, and Turkey (these
show clustering too)

Authors not arguing one type of capitalism is superior. Both provide
capabilities of long run economic performance. Instead authors **argue**
that the economics have quite different capacities for innovation. In
addition they tend to distribute income and employment differently. Also
see figure 1.2 below form p 22.

**1.3 Coordinated Market Economies: The German Case**

Capitalist economies: systems in which companies and individuals invest
in machines, material, technology, and competencies based on relations
with others that entail cooperation problems. In CMEs, firms resolve
many of these problems through strategic interaction and the resulting
equilibria depends in part on the supportive institutions.

Here the authors use Germany to illustrate how non-market coordination
is achieve in each of the principal spheres of firm endeavor:

1.  The financial system or market for corporate governance in CMEs
    provides firms with access to finance that is not entirely dependent
    on publicly available financial data or current returns. Firms must
    then have access to private/inside information and the problem is
    resolved in CMEs by the presence of dense networks linking managers
    and technical personnel inside a firm to counterparts in other firms
    to share information.

    a.  Information is available via: (1) close relationships that
        companies cultivate with suppliers and clients, (2) the
        knowledge secured from networks of cross-shareholding, and (3)
        joint membership in industry associations.

    b.  CME firms depend on tax provisions, securities regulations, and
        networks that discourage hostile takeovers.

2.  The internal structure of the firm reinforces the network systems in
    many CMEs. Also stops unilateral action by top managers --
    structural bias toward consensus decision-making

3.  CMEs need industrial relations institutions capable of resolving
    worker poaching and hold ups. Germany's system addresses these by
    setting wages through industry-level bargains between trade unions
    and employer associations. Equalizes wages at skill levels. By
    coordinating bargaining across the economy, these arrangements also
    limit the inflationary effects of wage settlements.

4.  CMEs depend on education and training systems capable of supplying
    skilled workers. Workers must be assured they will get lucrative
    employment while firms investing int raining need to know they will
    get skilled workers. Germany relies on industry-wide employer
    associations and trade unions to supervise publicly subsidized
    training program.

5.  CME firms tend to cultivate inter-company relations of the sort that
    facilitate the diffusion of technology across the economy. In
    Germany, these relationships are supported by a number of
    institutions. Business associations promote technology diffusion.
    Research is financed jointly by firms often in collaboration with
    quasi-public research institutions.


**1.4. Liberal Market Economies: The American Case**

In LMEs, firms rely more heavily on market relations to resolve
coordination problems that CMEs address via non-market coordination. In
each of the major spheres of form endeavor, competitive markets are more
robust and there is less institutional support for non-market forms of
coordination.

1.  Features of the financial systems or markets for corporate
    governance encourage firms to be attentive to current earnings and
    share price. Regulatory regimes are tolerant of mergers and
    acquisitions, including hostile ones. The terms on which large firms
    can secure finance are heavily dependent on their valuation in
    equity markets, where dispersed investors depend on publicly
    available information to value a company. LMEs lack the close-knit
    networks of information sharing. Some qualifications for these
    generalizations, on the whole however, markets for corporate
    governance in LMEs encourages firms to focus on publicly accessible
    dimensions of their performance to affect share price, such as
    current profitability

2.  In the industrial relations arena, LME firms rely on the market
    relationships between individuals and the employer to organize
    relations. LMEs depend more heavily on macroeconomic policy and
    market competition to control wages and inflation. The presence of a
    highly fluid labor market influences strategies pursued by firms

3.  Education and training systems in LMEs are generally complementary
    to fluid labor markets. Training is done through institutions
    offering formal education in general skills -- career success also
    depends on acquiring the general skills that can be used in many
    different firms. LME firms do substantial in-house training in the
    specific.

4.  Inter-company relations in LMEs are based on standard market
    relationships and enforceable formal contracts -- mediated by
    rigorous antitrust regulations -- firms wishing to engage in
    relational contracts with other firms get little legal support.
    Technology transfer occurs through the movement of scientists and
    engineers from one company to another in the fluid labor market. LME
    firms also rely on sale or licensing of innovations.

    a.  In LME, research consortia and inter-firm collaboration play
        less important roles in the process of technology transfer in
        CMEs where the institutional environment is more conducive.

See figure 1.4 on p 32 for complementarities in American LME system

**1.5 Comparing Coordination**

Even within the two types, variations can be found. One important CME
variation axis is the those who rely primarily on industry-based
coordination v those that foster group-based coordination. Difference in
character of these business networks have major implications, see
Germany (intra-industry cooperation) v Japan (vertical keiretsu).

Japanese firms lack the capacities for radical innovation of American
firms and the sector-centered technology transfer of German firms --
instead the Japanese political economy encourages comparative advantage
of the capacities for cross-sector technology transfer and rapid
organizational redeployment provided by keiretsu. This translates into
advantages in large-scale production of consumer goods, machinery, and
electronics that exploit existing technology and capacity for
organizational change.

**1.6 Comparative Institutional Advantage**

Question central to international economics: how to construe comparative
advantage which implies that free trade allows for specialization and
flourishing of all countries through free trade. Dealt a serious blow
aby the expansion of intra-industry trade and increases in international
mobility of capital -- if this theory is correct, nations should not
import/export high volumes of goods form the same sector and that
capital movement will even out national factor endowments.

Intra-industry trade is the result of efforts to concentrate production
in order to secure returns to scale. Others concentrate particular kinds
of production in some nations to secure positive externalities by groups
of firms in related endeavors. Similar firms will cluster together
(Silicon Valley).

Theory can be found in concept of 'comparative institutional advantage':
institutional structure of a particular political economy provides firms
with advantages for engaging in specific types of activities there.
Firms can perform some activities, which produce some goods more
efficiently than others because of the institutional support they
receive for those activities in the political economy, and the
institutions relevant to these activities are not distributed evenly
across nations.

The availability of the different modes of coordination conditions the
efficiency with which they can produce certain kinds of goods and
services -- the national institutional frameworks examined provide
nations with comparative advantages in particular activities and
produces. In the presence of trade, these advantages should give rise to
cross-national patterns of specialization.

Authors focus on impact of innovation -- capacity to innovate is crucial
to a firm's success. Distinction between radical innovation (substantial
shifts in product lines, the development of entirely new goods, or major
changes to the production process) v incremental innovation (continuous
but small-scale improvements to existing product lines and production
processes). Over the medium and long term, efficiency in the production
of some kinds of goods requires capacity for radical innovation, while
others requires incremental innovation capacity.

Radical -- important for fast-moving technology -- biotech,
semiconductors & software, as well as complex systems-based products
(telecoms, defense systems) and their service-sector analogs (airlines,
advertising, corporate finance, etc.)

Incremental -- maintaining competitiveness in the production of capital
goods, machine tools, factory equipment, consumer durables, engines,
specialized transport equipment -- key is maintaining high quality of
already established product line.

CMEs are better suited to incremental because of need for high levels of
relational requirements and corporate structure of consensus
decision-making.

LMEs are better suited to radical because emphasis on current
profitability and corporate structure that concentrates unilateral
control.

To the extent allowed by transport costs and the efficiency of
international markets, there should be national patterns of
specialization in activities and products; and these should reflect
national responses to the institutional frameworks IDed here rather than
random geographic agglomeration. See figure 1.5 & a.6 on pp 42-43 below
for evidence

CMEs and LMEs also offer different levels of quality control due to
relationships with workers and suppliers -- and labor where in a LME
labor market if more fluid.

**1.7 New Perspectives on Comparative Public Policy-Making**

Implications open new perspectives on both economic and social
policy-making with relevance for the domestic arena and international
relations.

[1.7.1 Economic Policy-Making]{.underline}

Principal problem facing policy-makers is one of inducing economic
actors to cooperate more effectively with each other. More effective
coordination among other actors, such as trade unions and employers,
will also enhance performance. Accordingly, one of the principal ways in
which policy-makers can improve national economic performance is to
secure better forms of coordination among private-sector actors.

The development of supportive institutions and the cultivation of a base
of common knowledge may be crucial here to entice information sharing,
create credible commitments, and alter expectations.

Economic policies will be effective only if they are incentive
compatible -- namely complementary to the coordinating capacities
embedded in the existing political economy. In LMEs, better economic
performance may demand policies that sharpen market competition. In
CMEs, better economic performance may benefit from policies that
reinforce the capacities of actors for non-market coordination.

Wood **argues** that the viability of policy depends not only on the
organization of the political economy but on the organization of the
political realm. Coordination-oriented policies must be based on high
levels of information, but firms are reluctant to share information with
governments. The transaction costs to governments of coordinating the
activities of many private-sector actors can also be prohibitively high.
This kind of policy-making is marked by information asymmetries, high
transaction costs, and time-inconsistency problems.

Coordination-oriented policies will be more difficult to implement in
LMEs because their business and labor associations usually lack the
encompassing character required to administer such policies well.
Producer groups may be less willing to enter into implicit contracts in
nations where they do not posses enough structural influence to sanction
the government for deviations from them -- especially a problem in
nations where the powers of the state are highly concentrated in the
political executive or where the influence of producer groups inside
political parties is very limited.

This analysis suggests that the attributes normally associated with the
'strength' of a state may prevent governments form implementing many
kinds of policies effectively.

LMEs should find it more feasible to implement market-incentive policies
that do not put extensive demands on firms to form relational contracts
with others but rely on markets to coordinate their activities.
Includes: regional development schemes based on tax incentives,
vocational training program focused on formal instruction in marketable
skills, and government subsidies for basic research. Deregulation is
often the most effective way to improve coordination in LMEs because of
the bluntness of instruments available to states and the importance of
markets to these economies.

If regimes that provide structural influence to encompassing producer
groups find it more feasible to implement coordination-oriented
policies, while states in which power is highly concentrated have more
success with market-incentive policies, the character of the political
regime may contribute to the development of a particular type of
economy. More general terms: the character of the political regime may
condition the levels of asset specificity found across nations.

Political regimes characterized by coalition governments, multiple veto
points, and parties that entrench the power of producer groups may also
be more conducive to investment in specific assets than ones that
concentrate power in highly autonomous party leaders because (1) regimes
of this sort are well positioned to provide the framework policies that
sustain the institutions supporting specific investments, and (2)
because they provide producers with more direct influence over
government and the capacity to punish it for deviating from its
agreements, such regimes offer investors more assurance that policy will
not shift in such a way as to damage the value of assets that cannot be
readily switched to other uses.

[1.7.2 Social Policy]{.underline}

This approach highlights the important of social policy to firms and the
role that business groups play in the development of welfare states.
Social policies can provide for the relationships firms develop to
advance their objects. For instance, unemployment benefits with high
replacement rates can improve the ability of firms to attract and retain
pools of labor with high or specific skills. Disability benefits and
early retirement benefits can allow firms that operate production
regimes requiring employee loyalty to release labor w/o violating
implicit contracts about long-term employment.

Correspondence between types of political economies and types of welfare
states. Liberal social-policy regimes also encourage individuals to
develop the general rather than specific, skills that corporate
strategies in LMEs tend to require.

[1.7.3 National Interests in the International Arena]{.underline}

Conceptions of national interest form which government officials operate
in international negotiations are most often seen, however, as a
response to pressure from domestic interests

Fioretos applies perspective to Maastricht treaty -- **argues** that
many of the conflicts between Britain and the other member-states of the
EU, leading to its opt-out from the social charter, can be traced to
British efforts to protect the institutions of its liberal market
economy.

Germany's reluctance to accept deep financial deregulation may derive,
for instance, not simply from a desire to maintain the rents of its
financial sector but form a concern to preserve the capacities for
network monitoring that sustain the terms on which domestic capital is
available to firms. Britain's efforts to secure regulations that enhance
market competition in many sectors may reflect an interest in securing a
competitive edge for its own firms, whose corporate strategies and
structures are already appropriate for operating in such environments.

This perspective may help explain why it has been so difficult for the
EU to secure full regulatory harmonization and why it has resorted,
instead, to the 'mutual recognition' of national regulations.
Transaction costs alone do not provide enough of an explanation.

Despite significant effects, international negotiations are unlikely to
be vehicles for cross-national institutional convergence that some
expect from them. More than national tradition is at stake.

**1.8 The Dynamics of Economic Adjustment**

Authors expect corporate strategies, policies, and institutions in each
nation to evolve in response to challenges, and the approach contains
tools for understanding the nature of challenges and the shape evolution
will probably take.

[1.8.1 The Challenge of Globalization]{.underline}

For political economy, the principal issue raised by globalization
concerns the stability of regulatory regimes and national institutions
in the face of heightened competitive pressure.

Conventional view of globalization rests on three pillars: (1) sees
firms as essentially similar across nations at least in terms of basic
structure and strategy, (2) associates the competitiveness of firms with
their unit labor costs, from which it follows that many will move
production abroad if they can find cheaper labor, and (3) these
propositions generate a model of the political dynamic inspire by
globalization of the following type:

In response to firms existing the economy, governments are said to come
under pressure from business to alter their regulatory frameworks to
lower domestic labor costs, reduce taxation, and expand internal markets
via deregulation. Precise effects each nation suffers from globalization
can be determined by the amount of political resistance that labor and
the left can mount to proposals for change. Because international
interdependence provides capital with more exist opportunities, balance
of power has shifted into capital's favor. In short, this model predicts
substantial deregulation and a convergence of economic institutions
across nations.

[1.8.2 Reconsidering Globalization]{.underline}

This approach questions assumptions:

(1) Suggests firms are not essentially similar across nations -- LME and
    CME firs develop distinctive strategies and structures to capitalize
    on institutions available for market and non-market coordination.

(2) Suggests firms will not automatically move activities off-shore when
    offered low-cost labor. Firms derive comparative advantage from
    their home country institutions that support specific type of intra-
    and inter-firm relationships. Many firms will be reluctant to give
    these up. Comparative institutional advantages tend to render
    companies less mobile than theories that do not acknowledge them
    imply.

(3) Suggests dimensions to the movement of firms abroad that
    conventional views do not anticipate. Firms in LMEs are more
    inclined to move abroad than CME firms because the former already
    coordinate their endeavors using market structure while the latter
    often pursue corporate strategies that rely on high skills and
    institutional infrastructure.

(4) Suggests firms may exploit opportunities to move to engage in
    institutional arbitrage -- companies may shift activities to other
    nations in order to secure the advantages that the institutional
    frameworks of their political economies offer for pursuing those
    activities. Overtime, movements of this sort should reinforce
    differences in national institutional frameworks as firms that have
    shifted their operations to benefit from particular institutions
    seek to retain them.

    a.  Companies may move some of their activities to LMEs not simply
        to lower labor costs, but to secure access to institutional
        support for radical innovation.

    b.  Companies may move activities to CMEs in order to secure access
        to quality control, skill levels, and capacities for incremental
        innovation.

(5) Predicts different political dynamics in LMEs and a different one in
    CMEs.

    a.  LMEs will see the weakening of labor and deregulation seen
        above.

    b.  In CMEs, government should be less sympathetic to deregulation
        because it threatens the nation's comparative competitive
        institutional advantages. Political dynamic form globalization
        less likely to cause class-conflict and center around
        cross-class coalitions

Deregulation has been far-reaching in LMEs (Britain, US, NZ, Canada and
Australia), but less extensive in coordinated market economies of
northern Europe and east Asia.

Because of comparative institutional advantage, nations often prosper,
not by becoming more similar, but by building on their institutional
differences.

[1.8.3 Developments in the Market for Corporate Governance]{.underline}

Another side of globalization, stemming from the internationalization of
finance -- puts pressure on the institutions of CMEs in several ways:
international markets are an important source of capital for large
firms, but lacking monitoring facilities to look at a company closely,
distant investors usually prefer to supply capital at arms-length that
emphasize transparent, balance-sheet criteria \[short-term gain\].

Also important is wave of international merger and acquisition activity
-- CMEs usually not as concerned with rate of return on capital or share
prices as American firms but shares that are highly valued can be
significant asset in merger and acquisition contests.

Similarly, some of the large banks and insurance companies in CMEs that
once cultivated close relations with manufacturing firms have been
disengaging form them in order to free up resources for global
expansion.

[1.8.4 Analyzing Change in National Systems]{.underline}

Authors see national political economies as systems that often
experience external shocks emanating from a world economy in which
technology and tastes change -- these shocks will unsettle the
equilibria on which firms are coordinating. Authors expect firms to
adjust oriented to the institutional recreation of comparative advantage
-- firms and individuals will modify their relational investments,
seeking new competencies that entail new relations with other firms or
employees. To do so they will call on existing institutional structure
supporting coordination in the economy, including those that allow for
deliberation and making credible commitments.

Although authors expect firms to sustain or restore forms of
coordination on which their comparative advantage is built, after a
shock these efforts may entail changes to existing institutions or
practices. The importance of common knowledge to successful strategic
interaction implies some asymmetry in the development potential of these
systems.

Because of complementarities, institutional reform in one sphere may
snowball into changes in other spheres as well. For instance, as CME
financial markets are deregulated, it may be more difficult for firms to
offer long-term employment.

Summary: this approach to political economy designed not only to ID
important patterns of similarity and difference across nations but also
to elucidate the processes whereby national political economies change.
It anticipates institutional change in all the developed democracies, as
they adjust to contemporary challenges, but provides a framework within
which the import of those changes can be assessed.
