
# Metadata
## Identifiers
title: CONSTITUTIONAL CHOICES FOR NEW DEMOCRACIES 
author(s): Arend  #Lijphart
year: #y1991 
citation:
link:

## Linkers

sub-theme(s): #Constitution #Democracy #Elections #Party_Politics 
keywords:

## TLDR

RQ:
Main Argument:
DV:
IV:
Cases:
Main Findings:
Data:
Method:
Empirical Evidence: 
How does the evidence map onto the theoretical argument: 

# Long Summary

**CONSTITUTIONAL CHOICES FOR NEW DEMOCRACIES -** Arend Lijphart

It is of crucial importance to evaluate two sets of choices the form
political systems of democracies: presidential v. parliamentary system
and plurality elections and proportional representation

Electoral system is significantly related to the development of a
country\'s party system, its type of executive (one-party vs. coalition
cabinets), and the relationship between its executive and legislature.

Plurality method leads to two-party systems, one-party governments, and
executives that are dominant in relation their legislatures
(majoritarian cluster).While proportional representation (PR) is likely
to be associated with multiparty systems, coalition governments, and
more equal executive-legislative power relations (consensus cluster).

Relationship between those variables are mutual. Plurality elections
favor the maintenance of a two-party system and two-party system favors
the maintenance of plurality. However, electoral system is a defining
variable.

In addition, important variations exist among PR system between extreme
PR and moderate PR (where there are barriers for small parties). For
instance, Dutch, Israeli, and Italian are extreme PR while German and
Swedish systems are a moderate PR.

The second basic constitutional choice, between parliamentary and
presidential forms of government, also affects the majoritarian or
consensus character of the political system. When you separate executive
form legislative you create a balance between executive and legislator,
but presidentialism foster two party system because it creates huge
political prize that can be won only by the largest party. Therefore,
presidentialism lead to spill over into legislator branch. In other
words, presidentialism produces situation where legislative and
executive power lies in the same hands.

**Explaining Past Choices**

He concerned with the question: What are the main advantages and
disadvantages of plurality and PR and of presidentialism and
parliamentarism?

He argues that the choice of the system for many countries depends on
the influence that was applied on them from outside. For instance,
Philippines and Puerto Rico were influenced by the United States and
they have presidentialism and plurality. Countries in Latin America
opted for presidential-PR systems. Parliamentary-plurality systems exist
in the United Kingdom and many former British colonies, including India,
Malaysia, Jamaica, and the countries of the so-called Old Commonwealth.
Parliamentary-PR systems are concentrated in Western Europe. So the
system is determined by geographic, cultural, and colonial factor.

There are some exceptions that doe not fit this classification: France
and Switzerland and those that use electoral methods other than pure PR
or plurality (Ireland, Japan, and, again, France)

Two important factors influenced the adoption of PR in continental
Europe:

1.  Problem of ethnic and religious minorities (representation for
    minorities

2.  PR was adopted through a convergence of pressures from below (rising
    working class) and from above (old parties that were threatened).

The process of democratization also originally determined whether
parliamentary or presidential institutions were adopted. Removal of the
monarch and then election of new monarch lead to presidential system. In
contrast, gradual removal of the monarch's power to the elected cabinet
lead to parliamentary system

Author introduce term "quality" of democracy -- which refers to the
degree to which a system meets such democratic norms as
representativeness, accountability, equality, and participation

PR yields greater proportionality and minority representation.
Proportionalists value minority representation not just for its
democratic quality but also for its ability to maintain unity and peace
in divided societies.

Plurality promotes two-party systems and one-party executives, which
arguably gives democratic accountability but the firm leadership and
effective policymaking. (Here more emphasis on effectiveness or capacity
to govern)

**Evaluating Democratic Performance**

Author wants to evaluate democratic representation and responsiveness,
economic equality, and macroeconomic management. The analysis limited to
advanced industrial democracies (due to the availability of the data).

In his analysis:

4 cases of parliamentarism-plurality (Australia, Canada, New Zealand,
and the United Kingdom)

9 democracies of the Parliamentary-PR type (Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden)

1 of presidential-plurality which is US

He excluded cases that do not fit into one of the categories (France,
Ireland, Japan, and Switzerland) or because they are too vulnerable to
external factors (Israel, Iceland, and Luxembourg).

Because there are so many different kinds of minorities in the
democracies under analysis, it is difficult to measure the degree to
which PR succeeds in providing more representativness for minorities.
Therefore, he compares representation of women (as a minority in
political rather than strictly numerical terms)

In parliamentary-PR systems, we have higher representation of women
(column 1)

In addition, parliamentary-PR systems has higher ratings in
innovativeness and expansiveness of family policies (column 2 -- scale
from 0 to 12).

Last three columns of Table 1 show indicators of democratic quality.

Column 4 is about political equality (World Bank\'s percentages of total
income earned by the top 20 percent of households). It shows slightly
less unequal distribution of income in the parliamentary-PR.

Column 5 Dahl\'s ranking of democracies according to ten indicators of
democratic quality (freedom of press, association, competitive party
system, strong parties and interest groups, and effective legislatures)
1 is good 6 is low.

No clear differences are apparent when we examine the effect of the type
of democracy on the maintenance of public order and peace.
Parliamentary-plurality systems had the lowest incidence of riots during
the period 1948-77, but the highest incidence of political deaths (but
it is mainly derived from UK numbers).

A major argument in favor of plurality systems has been that they favor
\"strong\" one-party governments that can pursue \"effective\" public
policies. One key area of government activity in which this pattern
should manifest itself is the management of the economy.

height="1.907898075240595in"}

From the table we can see that parliamentary-plurality and
parliamentary-PR countries as groups do not differ much from each other
or from the United States. However, we can see that parliamentary-PR is
slightly better than parliamentary-plurality

**Lessons for Developing Countries**

The parliamentary-PR systems almost invariably post the best records,
particularly with respect to representation, protection of minority
interests, voter participation, and control of unemployment.

However, Moderate PR and moderate multipartism, as in Germany and
Sweden, offer more attractive models than the extreme PR and multiparty
systems of Italy and the Netherlands.

Are these conclusions relevant to newly democratic and democratizing
countries which are trying to make democracy work in the face of
economic underdevelopment and ethnic divisions? Maybe it is better for
them to have strong executive leadership?

The authors answer is that divided societies, both in the West and
elsewhere, need peaceful coexistence among the contending ethnic groups.
This requires conciliation and compromise, goals that in turn require
the greatest possible inclusion of representatives of these groups in
the decision-making process. So parliamentary and PR will better for
this.

**PR and Economic Policy Making**

He argued that we do not have reliable data with regards the question of
what would be better for economic development.

However, the conventional wisdom states that economic development
requires the unified and decisive leadership of a strong president.
However, economic development requires not so much a strong hand as a
steady one.

The widespread skepticism about the economic capability of
parliamentary-PR systems stems from confusing governmental strength with
effectiveness. In addition multiparty and coalition governments seem to
be messy, quarrelsome, and inefficient in contrast to the clear
authority of strong presidents and strong one-party cabinets.

In summary, the parliamentary-PR form of democracy is clearly better
than the major alternatives in accommodating ethnic differences, and it
has a slight edge in economic policy making as well
